[Unknown]: IVM.
[Amit Varma]: Jurassic period, the supercontinent of Pangaea began to break up.
[Amit Varma]: Pangaea itself began to move west, splitting up into multiple fragments and as a result
[Amit Varma]: creating new oceans out of the super ocean that surrounded it, Panthalosa.
[Amit Varma]: The tectonic plate that contained what is today India, severed itself and sped northeast
[Amit Varma]: across what would later become the Pacific and Indian oceans.
[Amit Varma]: I say sped in a geological sense of course.
[Amit Varma]: It took about 115 million years and about 65 million years ago, this plate containing
[Amit Varma]: what we now call India, crashed into the Laurasian plate which contained Eurasia and what later
[Amit Varma]: became North America.
[Amit Varma]: Imagine in your mind's eye what happens in a time lapse spanning millennia as these two
[Amit Varma]: enormous landmasses collide together and the violence of earth, sand and water as their
[Amit Varma]: edges rise up from the impact, high up towards the sky till the landmasses finally slow down,
[Amit Varma]: still moving but a bit more still.
[Amit Varma]: And these battered grotesque edges, the mountain ranges that rise up with the coming together
[Amit Varma]: of two ancient landmasses, how do we know them today?
[Amit Varma]: We know them as the Himalayas.
[Amit Varma]: They lie between India and China.
[Amit Varma]: That's how old our business is.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Xi Jinping, the president of the People's Republic of China and Narendra Modi, the Prime
[Amit Varma]: Minister of India, met recently at Mammalapuram.
[Amit Varma]: Besides the feel good quotes and the photo op in front of a giant rock that did not turn
[Amit Varma]: into Mick Jagger, what exactly was at stake for both sides?
[Amit Varma]: What is the China India relationship anyway in an age when China is fast becoming a superpower
[Amit Varma]: if it isn't already one and India aspires to get there?
[Amit Varma]: What are our common interests and what are the conflicts that we must resolve?
[Amit Varma]: In fact, to ask a question that many people around the world want to know and which has
[Amit Varma]: made the title of this episode, what does China want?
[Amit Varma]: To examine that, I've invited my friend Manoj Kevalramani, who works at the Takshashila
[Amit Varma]: Institution in Bangalore and who I regard as our finest China expert.
[Amit Varma]: Manoj has been on the seen and the unseen before in a superb episode about China itself
[Amit Varma]: and I'll link to that from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: He has also shed much insight on another show called the Pragati podcast hosted by my buddy
[Amit Varma]: Pawan Srinath and I'll link to those episodes as well as also to relevant episodes of all
[Amit Varma]: things policy, the in-house podcast of the Takshashila Institution.
[Amit Varma]: Before I begin my conversation with him, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Hey, I want to thank Intel for supporting the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: If you haven't already, I recommend you check out Intel vPro.
[Amit Varma]: Intel vPro is a business platform that maximizes the performance of your company's computers.
[Amit Varma]: Some of the things that your IT department will now pull off with Intel vPro will feel
[Amit Varma]: like magic.
[Amit Varma]: It can remotely turn your computer on or off, install software, do routine maintenance tasks.
[Amit Varma]: If something is wrong with the machine in your office, no more waiting for the IT guy
[Amit Varma]: to show up.
[Amit Varma]: Intel vPro will get the job done.
[Amit Varma]: When Intel powers a machine, what is seen is the Intel logo outside.
[Amit Varma]: But what is unseen is the Intel performance inside that powers your computers and keeps
[Amit Varma]: them running smoothly.
[Amit Varma]: We tend to take the unseen for granted.
[Amit Varma]: For more details, head on over to Intel.in slash vPro.
[Amit Varma]: That's vPro.
[Amit Varma]: Smooth computing, no tension.
[Guest]: Manoj, welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you so much for having me, Amit.
[Guest]: And yeah, thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: That was a wonderful introduction.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I that image of that giant rock will not leave my head.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get on to sort of China and India and so on, tell me a little bit more about
[Amit Varma]: yourself like your route to becoming a foreign policy expert is quite interesting.
[Guest]: Yeah, I've taken sort of a really strange route.
[Guest]: I was a journalist for much of my career.
[Guest]: Okay, so the first time I visited China was in 2001.
[Guest]: But the first time I went there alone was in 2005.
[Guest]: And it was really strange experience.
[Guest]: I was put on a bus.
[Guest]: I knew where I was supposed to go, but I didn't know where the bus was going.
[Guest]: I didn't know the language.
[Guest]: I didn't know anything.
[Guest]: And the bus drops me in the middle of the night at about half past three in this small
[Guest]: tiny town and a tiny little bus stop.
[Guest]: And at like about 3.30 a.m. in the morning, I have cab drivers coming and asking me where
[Guest]: I want to go.
[Guest]: Obviously, I didn't understand a word of what they were saying.
[Guest]: And my first reaction of sitting in that bus stop for the next two hours waiting for somebody
[Guest]: to come and pick me up was of absolute horror, wondering whether I'm going to become a fisherman
[Guest]: lost in some village in China.
[Guest]: But that was my introduction to the country.
[Guest]: Since then, the love affair has grown.
[Guest]: I've gone back repeatedly.
[Guest]: So as a journalist, I went back to China in about 2011.
[Guest]: After having spent about six years of working in India, I was always interested in foreign
[Guest]: policy.
[Guest]: I studied international relations.
[Guest]: I went to China, I did some freelance work.
[Guest]: And then I worked with Chinese state media for a few years, which gave me an interesting
[Guest]: insight into how the country operates.
[Guest]: What are the structures?
[Guest]: What are the processes?
[Guest]: How do people think?
[Guest]: I mean, there's a real divide between how people think in China about themselves and
[Guest]: how the world outside views them.
[Guest]: And yeah, and that was the way I got into studying China and foreign policy broadly.
[Amit Varma]: And given that you'd already studied international relations, I guess you must already have had,
[Amit Varma]: you know, conceptions of what China was like, what the Chinese were like, what they wanted,
[Amit Varma]: what the objectives were.
[Amit Varma]: Did actually spending time, you know, working in that country change your mind?
[Amit Varma]: And if so, in what ways?
[Guest]: So, yeah, I mean, you know, going into the country, you obviously have this image, particularly
[Guest]: when you come from India and in India, the frame that we look at China is a deep suspicion.
[Guest]: And even at our sort of points of time where we talk about heady cooperation, whether it
[Guest]: was in the 50s or whether it was in the early 2000s, when you were talking about this notion
[Guest]: of Chindia, there was a sense of, yes, euphoria, the ratio is rising, but there was also, there's
[Guest]: always a sense of suspicion.
[Guest]: So as an Indian going there and having studied in the West, you go with a deep sense of suspicion,
[Guest]: not just from a realist perspective of Indian interest, but also from a value based perspective
[Guest]: of being from a liberal democratic country in ethos to going to a country which is authoritarian,
[Guest]: communist and all of that.
[Guest]: But when you actually visit the country and live there for a significant amount of time,
[Guest]: you do realize that the authoritarianism comes in shades, like a shade card of a paint company.
[Guest]: You know, there are elements which are deep red, and then things start to sort of become
[Guest]: lighter in shade.
[Guest]: Criticism is allowed on different things.
[Guest]: And criticism takes place on different things.
[Guest]: People are people like they are everywhere.
[Guest]: They're looking for a better life.
[Guest]: People are looking for more space to voice their opinion in public and just basically
[Guest]: express themselves much more.
[Guest]: And you see that even in China.
[Guest]: And you see a diversity of opinion, which often does not get reflected in news coverage
[Guest]: of the country.
[Guest]: And also what also always happens in news coverage of the country is that we tend to
[Guest]: impose our own biases and our own perceptions without having understood why a country is
[Guest]: doing certain things.
[Guest]: What are the sort of historic drivers?
[Guest]: What are the economic drivers?
[Guest]: What are the political drivers of certain action?
[Guest]: Everything gets sort of clubbed together in this notion of authoritarianism, and therefore
[Guest]: state control.
[Guest]: And therefore, that framework defines everything.
[Guest]: Whereas there is much more push and pull happening between society, businesses, government, party,
[Guest]: which don't necessarily get reflected in broader coverage.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it's very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, you were talking about these nuances, and I found that the two episodes
[Amit Varma]: of the two part series you recorded with Pawan for the Pragati podcast, very illuminating,
[Amit Varma]: where you bust eight myths about China.
[Amit Varma]: And those myths are all about nuance in the sense that most of them are partly true, but
[Amit Varma]: not quite.
[Amit Varma]: For example, does China own, does the state own all the land?
[Amit Varma]: Well, yeah, kind of, but they give leases.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, so there is private property in the terms of what is built on those lands.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, you talk about how, you know, the media is fettered to the extent that they
[Amit Varma]: will not directly, you know, criticize the premier or whatever, but they will talk about
[Amit Varma]: the policy and within that marketplace that exists, you know, they will try to carve out
[Amit Varma]: niches with the presentation of the news.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, that it was kind of eye opening to me and you're right that, you know, many
[Amit Varma]: Indians sort of think of China as this whole monolithic beast and it isn't quite that.
[Guest]: Yeah, it isn't quite that.
[Guest]: And I mean, I think there is justified reason for, in many ways, the Chinese media and the
[Guest]: Chinese messaging is to blame for this.
[Guest]: They would like to emphasize that, you know, that there is a strong central command over
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: And on many things, there is strong central control.
[Guest]: But this messaging that they also tend to deliver, and it varies from time to time.
[Guest]: So if you look at the early 2000s to the till Xi Jinping comes to power, there is a sense
[Guest]: that the Chinese themselves are delivering this message to you, that there is greater
[Guest]: diversity here.
[Guest]: And there's much more happening here.
[Guest]: But once Xi Jinping comes to power, things begin to consolidate and the messaging also
[Guest]: changes because you want to message to the outside world of a strong leader because you
[Guest]: also want to bring political legitimacy for his control within the country.
[Guest]: So there are multiple reasons why this messaging goes out.
[Guest]: And therefore, there is a strand of truth that yes, the central government controls
[Guest]: a lot of things, the central leadership and the party across the board from center to
[Guest]: provinces to villages has a significant role to play and has an increasing role to play
[Guest]: under Xi Jinping.
[Guest]: But the fact that there is societal pushback is missed quite frequently.
[Guest]: And one of the sort of classic cases of this is legislation on domestic violence.
[Guest]: Recently, there's been lots of controversy in China about a domestic violence bill, which
[Guest]: was passed in 2016.
[Guest]: And the bill creates more room for women to sort of file for divorce on grounds of domestic
[Guest]: violence.
[Guest]: Yet, often the judiciary is conflicted between protecting women's rights and following the
[Guest]: parties dictate that family issues are also a matter of broader social harmony.
[Guest]: So therefore, you see judges giving these misguided judgments where sometimes you will
[Guest]: acknowledge that there is violence, but not grant divorce because it might impact the
[Guest]: broader social fabric, which is absurd.
[Guest]: But there is still pushback against this and people end up winning cases once sort of the
[Guest]: narrative begins.
[Guest]: And this one particular case in Sichuan, which was recently reported, the lady ends up going
[Guest]: and appealing this verdict of not granting her divorce.
[Guest]: And there is a bit of a public narrative that builds around this.
[Guest]: And eventually the courts have to grant her divorce.
[Guest]: So this is a sort of pull between state policy, party, party desires to individuals pushing
[Guest]: back against this.
[Amit Varma]: I guess, you know, what I often say about India that we sort of inhabit different centuries
[Amit Varma]: at once, 1920 and 21st is in a sense true of China as well.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, the kind of these tussles around modernity that you mentioned in the judicial
[Amit Varma]: case is something that you see in India as well, where you will have judges telling rape
[Amit Varma]: victims that why don't you marry your rapist and things like that.
[Amit Varma]: So I guess that's one thing that's common to both countries.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one interesting difference between India and China, which we discussed in our
[Amit Varma]: last episode as well, is that in India, the idea of India or the battling ideas of India
[Amit Varma]: are all relatively recent.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, we were basically many nations started coming together, perhaps because of the East
[Amit Varma]: India Company and the British Empire.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, now we are what we are and, you know, because memories are so short, there
[Amit Varma]: seems to be the sense of permanence about it.
[Amit Varma]: But the ideas of India are relatively recent.
[Amit Varma]: The idea of China, on the other hand, stretches back centuries.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you'd use this phrase, Tianxia to describe it, you know, all under the heaven.
[Amit Varma]: The idea of China as a middle kingdom with the rest of the world revolving around it.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that and how that idea has found expression through the ages.
[Guest]: So this notion of Tianxia sort of goes back a couple of thousand years, actually.
[Guest]: So if you look at China, one of the things that at least even the current government
[Guest]: in China and the Communist Party sort of tries to project is of the sense of a continuous
[Guest]: civilization.
[Guest]: And that allows you to trace yourself back to about a couple of thousand years ago.
[Guest]: So about say 1500 BC or you have a dynasty called the Shang Dynasty.
[Guest]: The Shang Dynasty has sort of, it's the territory they control is nowhere close to what modern
[Guest]: day China is like.
[Guest]: It's a very small chunk of territory, but that's seen as the dynasty.
[Guest]: And that begins with controlling a lot of narrative.
[Guest]: And the Shangs believe in a certain deity, which is the supernatural entity, which is
[Guest]: bestowing the emperor with certain authority.
[Guest]: The Shang Dynasty goes and you have the next dynasty come into place, which is Zhou.
[Guest]: And the Zhou essentially believe in something called the heavens.
[Guest]: And they believe that, well, it's not necessarily an individual deity type of sort of personification
[Guest]: of God.
[Guest]: It's the heavens are a system and an order.
[Guest]: And the word for heaven or sky in Mandarin is Tian.
[Guest]: And the idea is that, well, everything is under the set of heavens and there is an order
[Guest]: that has to be maintained.
[Guest]: And the emperor and the dynasty is maintaining that order as some sort of an agent of heavens.
[Guest]: And the heaven has given a mandate to the emperor to do so.
[Guest]: Fast forward, this dynasty also collapses as a brutal sort of period of wars between
[Guest]: different fiefdoms, which is called the Warring States period.
[Guest]: And then you have finally the Qin Dynasty, which unifies this, you know, the entire these
[Guest]: sort of warring states.
[Guest]: And then this idea of, well, we need a deity, but we also need an orderly system.
[Guest]: And it sort of usurps both these ideas and it creates this notion of everything under
[Guest]: the heaven and the emperor being the son of heaven.
[Guest]: And therefore you get Tianxia, which essentially means everything under the heaven.
[Guest]: And the emperor becomes the son of heaven.
[Guest]: Now in this sort of a worldview over the years, over the centuries, the world starts to get
[Guest]: structured largely ethnically, but also based on territory in terms of, you know, the central
[Guest]: realm.
[Guest]: And then you think of, imagine concentric circles around one central circle.
[Guest]: And what you will see is that the inner realm is the realm of the emperor.
[Guest]: The rest of it all is of course under the heavens.
[Guest]: And the emperor's grace and the emperor's rule radiates from the center outward.
[Guest]: But as you go outward, you find the inner subjects and then you find outer subjects
[Guest]: and then you find people at the furthest realms of the concentric circle, sort of the furthest
[Guest]: concentric circle, which is the barbarians.
[Guest]: And the emperor's job is essentially to sort of expand his realm and to be able to bring
[Guest]: civilization to these different realms.
[Guest]: Whereas the barbarians, well, you can, you might not be able to civilize them.
[Guest]: That's up for debate.
[Guest]: But that's essentially the Sinocentric worldview, where China becomes the center and therefore
[Guest]: the phrase, the middle kingdom again, which has much more to its origin.
[Guest]: It was related to that second dynasty that I mentioned, the Zhou dynasty, which was in
[Guest]: the center of these multiple warring states.
[Guest]: But essentially the idea that at the center of it all is China today and the world sort
[Guest]: of is around it and the realm of the emperor is sort of, the grace of the emperor is expanding
[Guest]: to these different realms.
[Guest]: And at the outermost edge are the barbarians, who you potentially can't civilize, but they
[Guest]: aren't necessarily as important.
[Guest]: And that's this notion of Dianxia, where you create a set of tributary states whom you
[Guest]: sort of associate with, there are inner subjects, which are your subjects, there are outer subjects,
[Guest]: and then there are tributary states and then there are barbarians.
[Guest]: And the tributary states are countries that you sort of subjugate in some sort of a relationship
[Guest]: where their leaders can kowtow before you and acknowledge your superiority and your
[Guest]: authority.
[Guest]: That does not mean that you annex territory.
[Guest]: Over the centuries, the relationship with the Chinese dynasties and their tributary
[Guest]: states has not necessarily been about annexing territory.
[Guest]: It's basically about acknowledging the civilizational superiority of China, which meant sometimes
[Guest]: adopting the calendar, adopting the language, adopting the script, adopting certain cultural
[Guest]: practices.
[Guest]: It meant preferable trading relationships.
[Guest]: It meant that you would get access to the Chinese market.
[Guest]: In return, obviously, you can come and kowtow, which is a long ceremonial process where you
[Guest]: basically come and kneel before the emperor and acknowledge his superiority over you.
[Guest]: And you can see reflections of, somewhere, reflections of this in modern Chinese behavior.
[Guest]: I wouldn't say it's necessarily modern Chinese foreign policy is directly derivative of this,
[Guest]: but this is a cultural strand which continues within the broader DNA.
[Guest]: And you can see that today when Xi Jinping greets foreign leaders who visit China, there's
[Guest]: a long red carpet.
[Guest]: He stands at the edge of it as the emperor greeting somebody who's coming.
[Guest]: Usually when the person who's sitting next to him is turned towards him in the photograph,
[Guest]: usually reportage of it will talk to you about how visiting dignitary came and told Xi Jinping
[Guest]: about how great his reform process has been, how wonderful China's development is, and
[Guest]: how much they can gain from China's development by partnering with China.
[Guest]: And all of that sort of tells you a little bit about this mentality of the Middle Kingdom
[Guest]: and the emperor and the son of heaven, who is this benevolent ruler, who's scholarly,
[Guest]: benevolent, powerful, and therefore commands respect.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, the Qing dynasty, of course, fell in 1911.
[Amit Varma]: And in 1949, the Communist Party finally takes over and Mao takes charge.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, the period between 1839 and 1949 is also referred to sometimes as a period
[Amit Varma]: of China's national humiliation, quote unquote.
[Amit Varma]: And as John Garver writes in Protracted Contest, one of the books you recommended on the India-China
[Amit Varma]: relationship, quote, as constructed by modern Chinese nationalism during the period between
[Amit Varma]: 1839 and 1949, China was bullied, oppressed and exploited by foreign imperialism.
[Amit Varma]: One dimension of this humiliation was a seizure of Chinese territory by aggressive imperialist
[Amit Varma]: powers, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And these terrorists, of course, include places where there were ethnic Chinese, like, which
[Amit Varma]: is Han people like Taiwan, Hong Kong, Macau, but also those populated by non-Han people
[Amit Varma]: like Vietnam, Mongolia, and Korea.
[Amit Varma]: So when Mao comes to power in 1949, and this more than a century of humiliation, as it
[Amit Varma]: were, has ended, what is the sort of response to the world that emerges from there?
[Guest]: So there is, I'm just going to sort of trace back a little bit and talk about the century
[Guest]: of humiliation, because it's an interesting sort of trope, which continues to play a role
[Guest]: even in today's present day Chinese foreign policy, right?
[Guest]: I mean, one of the things that the Chinese side has been talking about in its negotiations
[Guest]: with the US in terms of this trade deal is that we will not sign up to unequal treaties.
[Guest]: And this unequal treaty sort of conception goes back to the opium wars, where the first
[Guest]: opium war, the Qing dynasty lost, and that launched the century of humiliation.
[Guest]: Essentially, the idea was this, that the strong Qing state had begun to collapse, and foreigners
[Guest]: had come to take stake in it.
[Guest]: There was a lot of gunboat diplomacy, which led to, say, Britain signing this lease for
[Guest]: 100 years with Hong Kong, managing more territory.
[Guest]: And all of this was done for trading purposes and trading rights.
[Guest]: And the Qing emperor starts to concede trading rights, not just to Britain, but to many other
[Guest]: European powers.
[Guest]: Germany eventually occupies a large part of Shandong province.
[Guest]: And there's a lot of this that happens.
[Guest]: China's coast begins to be forcefully opened up.
[Guest]: The Qing emperor sort of have very little control over this.
[Guest]: And there's this sort of number of reasons.
[Guest]: I mean, historically, if you look at the literature in China, what they will tell you is that
[Guest]: it was our folly.
[Guest]: We were weak.
[Guest]: And we were weak because we were stuck to certain dogma and certain processes of the
[Guest]: past without looking to modernize.
[Guest]: So in that period of following the first opium war, actually even before the first opium
[Guest]: war, but following that more so, there's this movement called the self-strengthening movement.
[Guest]: And that's a bunch of people who are learned, some of whom have attempted the civil services
[Guest]: exam but failed it because the exam is so driven by rote learning and understanding
[Guest]: of the classics, but not about say modern systems like what's a modern financial system
[Guest]: like how do you develop new trading links?
[Guest]: How do you do modern banking?
[Guest]: What sort of technology do you need?
[Guest]: How do you invest in modern weaponry?
[Guest]: But it's actually looking at sort of Confucian classics, which you need to memorize, which
[Guest]: have been standardized for decades and decades and centuries before.
[Guest]: So the relevance of that is in question.
[Guest]: And these guys are essentially saying, look, we need to change.
[Guest]: And in many ways, we need to learn from the West, because if we have to survive in a world
[Guest]: which is changing, and that was a changing world with the Industrial Revolution, we need
[Guest]: to adapt and we need to educate ourselves.
[Guest]: And for that, we need to learn from the Baharians who are coming over.
[Guest]: And there goes your trope for the Tianxia concept.
[Guest]: And that movement sort of builds, but it doesn't really achieve critical mass because there
[Guest]: are so many internal pushes and pulls, and the fact that the Europeans are sort of way
[Guest]: ahead of the Qing in terms of just their material capacity, and also the political will to go
[Guest]: and extract rewards from the Chinese Empire by force, that the Qing dynasty sort of starts
[Guest]: to begin to unravel.
[Guest]: Once it unravels, China goes through this massive period of turmoil, where initially
[Guest]: there is warlordism, there's a weak central government.
[Guest]: All of this sort of culminates into this sort of 1919 movement called the New Culture Movement,
[Guest]: or what is today known as the May 4th Movement.
[Guest]: On May 4th, 1919, after the First World War, you end up seeing a massive protest in Beijing
[Guest]: and many other cities, but in Beijing predominantly.
[Guest]: And this protest is about the Treaty of Versailles, the fact that the Germans had been defeated.
[Guest]: The Chinese felt that this would mean that their territory held by the Germans would
[Guest]: be given back to the Chinese government.
[Guest]: But that territory is traded off to the Japanese, and that angers a lot of people.
[Guest]: This is a search for a new system to hold China together, a new philosophy, a new idea.
[Guest]: So you're searching for this idea of China.
[Guest]: And in that, there are some people who are going to modern day nationalism, sort of driven
[Guest]: by European nationalism.
[Guest]: There are some people who are going back to the classics and saying, we need to go back
[Guest]: to what we were like.
[Guest]: And then there are others who are looking at new ideas like communism.
[Guest]: And therefore you have the Communist Party formed in 1921.
[Guest]: Again the next 30-35 years are a period of turmoil with the Japanese invasions, a civil
[Guest]: war between the Communist Party and the Nationalists led by Chiang Kai-shek.
[Guest]: And eventually you come to 1949, which is after the World War and after Japan has been
[Guest]: defeated and Japan sort of starts to recede from, to give up control of the territories
[Guest]: of China that they had control.
[Guest]: You end up with Mao Zedong taking charge.
[Guest]: And Mao Zedong takes charge as Chiang Kai-shek flees because after 1945, after the Second
[Guest]: World War ended, there was another period of three, four years of conflict between the
[Guest]: Nationalists and the Communists, which the Communists eventually win and Chiang Kai-shek
[Guest]: flees Taiwan, setting up the Republic of China in Taiwan.
[Guest]: And when Mao takes charge, he essentially looks at this.
[Guest]: He looks at two broad priorities.
[Guest]: The predominant thing that we today take away from Maoism is the idea of revolution and
[Guest]: people's war and promoting a communist revolution around the world.
[Guest]: But he blended that with this notion of China being the middle kingdom and also China being
[Guest]: a nationalistic entity.
[Guest]: So Mao was very clear that this is a system of states and yes, as much as we would like
[Guest]: global revolution, we realize that in this system of international system of states,
[Guest]: we need to become a powerful state.
[Guest]: And therefore he invests in sort of nuclear weapons.
[Guest]: He invests in science and technology, invests in the missile program.
[Guest]: He undertakes very flawed policies like the Great Leap Forward to sort of industrialize
[Guest]: and mechanize China very rapidly.
[Guest]: And that sort of falls flat on his face by doing that.
[Guest]: He also sort of harks back to history, which is like you mentioned, in Gawa's book, he
[Guest]: tells you that in 1954, China puts out a map which identifies territories of Chinese interest.
[Guest]: And that talks about the sense of nationalistic Chinese territories.
[Guest]: It's a nationalist vision as opposed to a world vision for a revolution.
[Guest]: Mao Zedong's first speech talks about China standing up.
[Guest]: That's clearly a nationalistic statement.
[Guest]: He talks about the century of humiliation.
[Guest]: He talks about the classics of the past.
[Guest]: So he's very cognizant of China as a civilization, as a state, and also as a revolutionary actor.
[Guest]: And he tries to blend that together by saying that China needs to be the middle kingdom
[Guest]: at the heart of this revolution.
[Guest]: So that's broadly how Mao Zedong sort of looks at history.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, that blending of nationalism with communism, you know, which otherwise
[Amit Varma]: typically doesn't take so much recourse to nationalism, seems to me also to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in later years, what they say today about socialism with Chinese characteristics.
[Amit Varma]: So it almost seems like you cannot really use any other lens to look at China because
[Amit Varma]: a key part of how they have constructed what they are lies sort of in their past.
[Amit Varma]: So how does sort of foreign policy evolve through the Mao years leading on to Deng?
[Amit Varma]: And how does it then change with Deng in the late 70s?
[Guest]: Okay, yeah, sure.
[Guest]: I have this framework, right?
[Guest]: You know, I teach a course in China.
[Guest]: And in that, I talk about this idea that there are three distinct phases of Chinese foreign
[Guest]: policy.
[Guest]: I mean, you can divide, people can slice history as they want to, I've sliced it in three distinct
[Guest]: phases.
[Guest]: The first phase is this revolutionary era, which is characterized by high levels of control,
[Guest]: a lot of elite friction also, although Mao is supreme, yet there is a lot of elite friction
[Guest]: and one of the reasons for this elite friction is because there is a focus on mass agitation.
[Guest]: Mao believes in people's wars and people's movements and people's evolutions.
[Guest]: Growth fluctuates radically.
[Guest]: So there are years where you will grow at, you know, 9% or double digit growth also.
[Guest]: And then suddenly the next year, you might, a year or two later, you might end up with
[Guest]: sort of negative growth.
[Guest]: And that's problematic because it causes much more chaos.
[Guest]: Foreign policy for Mao predominantly was ideological.
[Guest]: He saw ideology as not just, like I said, in terms of the revolution, but also in terms
[Guest]: of nationalism.
[Guest]: If you look at his early years, he was very close to the Soviet Union.
[Guest]: China learned a lot in the Soviet Union, not just in terms of the organizational structures
[Guest]: of a Leninist party state structure, but also in terms of say, technology, weapons development,
[Guest]: agricultural organization, and those sorts of things.
[Guest]: And he sort of followed the Soviet Union to a certain degree until there came a split
[Guest]: and that split had a lot to do with also internal dynamics within China, where Mao felt that
[Guest]: his position was being threatened by so-called revisionists who didn't believe in the ideology
[Guest]: as he did.
[Guest]: And those revisionists were linked to sort of changes in the Soviet Union.
[Guest]: And therefore, there's this period of seeing a Soviet split.
[Guest]: And during which, at the same time, you also see, you know, Mao going through launching
[Guest]: the cultural revolution domestically, which therefore means that his foreign policy objectives
[Guest]: become secondary in many ways, because he's focusing on the cultural revolution at home,
[Guest]: which is this tremendous violent period with millions and millions dying as student Red
[Guest]: Guards take to the streets.
[Guest]: You're burning books, you're attacking academics, you're attacking elites.
[Guest]: Xi Jinping's father, who was a senior party member, was one of the targets of the cultural
[Guest]: revolution.
[Guest]: Xi Jinping as a student was sent to work in a small village, and he lived in a cave, as
[Guest]: the famous story goes, as part of the cultural revolution.
[Guest]: So his education was sort of truncated at that point of time.
[Guest]: So that revolution still holds much sway in China today in terms of the historical memory
[Guest]: of it.
[Guest]: But that was Mao's foreign policy.
[Guest]: He looked at promoting revolution and he looked at China at the heart of that revolution.
[Guest]: There was very limited success.
[Guest]: Some of his gains were essentially about strengthening China's national power capacity through weapons
[Guest]: development, which gave China a seat at the table predominantly.
[Guest]: When it came to India, his approach was slightly mixed.
[Guest]: At some level, he saw India as a potential partner, but also a hegemonic successor to
[Guest]: the British Raj.
[Guest]: He saw the Indian state as being the Indian leadership at that point of time, being capitalist
[Guest]: in their orientation, Nehru particularly.
[Guest]: He saw them being Western educated and therefore being driven by those sorts of agendas.
[Guest]: He saw them as the mindset of the Indian foreign policy as being one of desiring hegemony over
[Guest]: what is South Asia and also territories which the Chinese were interested in, which is places
[Guest]: like Sikkim, Bhutan, Tibet.
[Guest]: And therefore, there was a sense of friction between these two countries, not just at a
[Guest]: level of territorial disputes, but also in the context of where they each saw their ideologies.
[Guest]: And that source of friction sort of persisted over a period of time.
[Guest]: After Deng Xiaoping, what happened was that China went through such a terrible phase in
[Guest]: the Cultural Revolution that once Deng Xiaoping took charge, Mao Zedong died in 1976.
[Guest]: And for two years, there was still a lot of turmoil with the Gang of Four, essentially
[Guest]: successors to Mao, lobbying for power and therefore continuing persecution until there's
[Guest]: a pushback from other party elites and the Gang of Four get tried and get sentenced.
[Guest]: And Deng Xiaoping emerges as this leader.
[Guest]: Deng himself had suffered in the Cultural Revolution.
[Guest]: He was himself chastised.
[Guest]: And he, once he takes charge, he looks at things pragmatically and he says, look, we
[Guest]: are millions and millions and hundreds of millions of people in China in deep poverty.
[Guest]: We can't be talking about revolution until we address some of these things.
[Guest]: We need to be open to the world abroad.
[Guest]: Under Mao, some changes had begun.
[Guest]: There was a rapprochement with the US which had begun and Deng Xiaoping takes that time
[Guest]: to nurture that rapprochement.
[Guest]: And in the early 80s, he travels to the US.
[Guest]: He launches what is a reform and opening up policy which says we're going to reform domestic
[Guest]: economic structures.
[Guest]: We're going to trim down the state.
[Guest]: We're going to pull back this ideological control a little bit.
[Guest]: The party still remains primary and the role of the party is at the heart of everything.
[Guest]: But we need to change the way we do business in order to achieve economic goals.
[Guest]: And so economic diplomacy and economic foreign policy becomes his primary objective.
[Guest]: And that's where things sort of start to develop with Deng Xiaoping.
[Guest]: When he starts to expand the Chinese economy, try and lift people out of poverty, and also
[Guest]: hedge with the US and the Soviet Union.
[Guest]: Under Gorbachev, with Deng Xiaoping, China and Soviet Union begin to get some sort of
[Guest]: a rapprochement again after their sort of tumultuous 60s and 70s.
[Guest]: But then the Soviet Union collapses and the ballgame changes entirely.
[Guest]: But for Deng Xiaoping predominantly, and even for his successors thereafter, the objective
[Guest]: of foreign policy was to pursue your interests, ensure that your territorial interests and
[Guest]: sovereignty remained intact and you didn't sort of succumb and give some of those away.
[Guest]: But you expand growth, ease control, while maintaining the central role of the Communist
[Guest]: Party of China.
[Guest]: And that's how it's been for the next 30-35 years until Xi Jinping sort of comes to power.
[Guest]: Actually a little before Xi Jinping, but say around 2008-2009.
[Guest]: And that's what broadly the foreign policy has been about.
[Guest]: It's been about economic development.
[Guest]: It's been about economic diplomacy, while ensuring that you remain fairly tough on issues
[Guest]: that are core to you, say Tibet, say Hong Kong, say even Taiwan.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and you know, one of Deng's slogans, of course, was hide your strength, bide your
[Amit Varma]: time, stop quote, which is, you know, almost like a paraphrasing of what Sun Tzu said centuries
[Amit Varma]: earlier, which is, quote, to subdue the enemy without fighting is the supreme excellence,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So just the phrase bide your time is very interesting, because it almost seems as if
[Amit Varma]: what happened in all the Deng years was that China was building its strength and biding
[Amit Varma]: its time, true to what he said, and then Xi Jinping onwards, they clearly feel that their
[Amit Varma]: time has come.
[Amit Varma]: Would that be a correct summation?
[Amit Varma]: And how has foreign policy changed since Xi Jinping?
[Amit Varma]: And how much of it is, for example, due to the powerful personality of the man himself?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, a lot of, you know, he centralized a lot of power around himself and clearly
[Amit Varma]: had his own vision of the world.
[Amit Varma]: How big a part does that play in the thing?
[Guest]: So yeah, I mean, Deng Xiaoping's logic of keeping a low profile, I mean, the phrase
[Guest]: is tao kuang yang hui, which, like you said, means broadly, roughly hide your strength
[Guest]: and bide your time, keep a low profile while pursuing your interests.
[Guest]: Essentially, what he wanted to do was what he could do.
[Guest]: China was a large country with a lot of problems and a lot of fundamental problems.
[Guest]: And you didn't have the capacity, while you might have had the will to sort of achieve
[Guest]: certain broader foreign policy objectives, you didn't have the capacity to do that.
[Guest]: And your objective predominantly was growth and development, because if you did not have
[Guest]: performance legitimacy over a period of time, it would be very difficult for the party to
[Guest]: sustain control over such a large population if it continued to remain that volatile.
[Guest]: So that was broadly what it was like.
[Guest]: His successors, so for example, Hu Jintao, who was a successor, who was after Jiang Zemin.
[Guest]: So Deng Xiaoping's leadership, the next big leader that comes out is Jiang Zemin and subsequently
[Guest]: Hu Jintao.
[Guest]: Hu Jintao had a policy recognizing that China was rising, right?
[Guest]: So his policy was about China's peaceful rise and China's sort of peaceful development.
[Guest]: And the idea was signaling to the world that, yes, while we are rising, we're not going
[Guest]: to be rising with violence.
[Guest]: We're going to be rising peacefully.
[Guest]: We're going to be rising by trying to lift all the boats together.
[Guest]: And in that process of rise, of course, things will change.
[Guest]: I mean, Edward Luttwak in his book on China has a really interesting analogy to describe
[Guest]: this, right?
[Guest]: He talks about China being this big elephant in an elevator.
[Guest]: And while the elephant is continuing to expand, it might not be threatening, it's squeezing
[Guest]: other people and therefore it will automatically seem threatening.
[Guest]: And that was essentially the sort of dilemma that Hu Jintao was facing.
[Guest]: And therefore this narrative of peaceful rise was framed.
[Guest]: Under Xi Jinping, what starts to happen is something very different.
[Guest]: And it starts a little bit before that, like I mentioned in the past.
[Guest]: So around 2008, 2009, you have financial crisis and the world economy is going through a downturn.
[Guest]: The US in particular is struggling.
[Guest]: The Chinese are particularly cognizant about this.
[Guest]: So in one of the sort of strategic economic dialogues with the Obama administration's
[Guest]: officials after the 2008 crisis hits, the Chinese are quoted as saying, look, we're
[Guest]: disappointed in you.
[Guest]: I mean, what on earth have you done?
[Guest]: And they're quite annoyed with the US for the particular failures that they've sort
[Guest]: of experienced, because they feel this causes economic problems for the Chinese also.
[Guest]: And it did cause economic problems because China's economy was predicated on export-led
[Guest]: growth.
[Guest]: And if your biggest export markets are today going through deep crises, you're never going
[Guest]: to be able to sustain that growth.
[Guest]: So they had to shift to higher investments and more debt and also launch a bailout package.
[Guest]: But at the same time, you saw an opportunity.
[Guest]: And the opportunity was in the fact that there is greater space opening up in the international
[Guest]: system.
[Guest]: And China today has the capacity and can continue to develop the capacity to exploit that space.
[Guest]: So starting from 2008, 2009, you see something start to shift.
[Guest]: You see them start to build these sort of start to work towards consolidating their
[Guest]: strength in the South China Sea.
[Guest]: You see the then Chinese foreign minister go to an ASEAN meeting and say something like,
[Guest]: you know, China is a big country and big countries do what we do.
[Guest]: And I was telling all these ASEAN states that, look, you're small states, you need to listen
[Guest]: to us.
[Guest]: And that's a different expression from what their normal diplomatic balance is, which
[Guest]: is that all states are equal, sovereignty is the norm and those sorts of things.
[Guest]: And you start to see this sense changing.
[Guest]: You also start to see a sense of nationalism beginning to rise.
[Guest]: And you start to see increasingly more assertive actions being taken.
[Guest]: All of this comes into this framework of a policy discussion that's going on within China,
[Guest]: whether we should fundamentally shift from this idea in our minds also, from being a
[Guest]: developing country, which is still keeping its head low and which is not interfering
[Guest]: too much, but actually just taking care of its interests predominantly, to now saying
[Guest]: that, look, we're a big country and we're a rising power.
[Guest]: And while we say that, let's acknowledge that to ourselves.
[Guest]: And that would mean a change in the way we behave and a change in the way of what we
[Guest]: expect from our behavior.
[Guest]: And therefore, this discussion sort of starts to take place.
[Guest]: So the shift from Deng Xiaoping's Taokuang Yanghui to a modern logic, which is called
[Guest]: Fanfa Youwei, which essentially means striving for achievement or striving to change your
[Guest]: external environment in order to suit your interests, actively doing things to change
[Guest]: it, as opposed to just reacting to keep your interests in check.
[Guest]: And under Xi Jinping, this sort of model starts to take far more prominence because he starts
[Guest]: to take actions to change the external environment.
[Guest]: One of the first things he does is he comes in, he announces this idea that everybody
[Guest]: needs to pursue a Chinese dream.
[Guest]: And that's a very populist framework, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you come out and you say, you know, every Chinese has a dream and this nation
[Guest]: has a dream and that nation's dream is the China dream.
[Guest]: And all of your cumulative dreams come together to create this China dream.
[Guest]: So that's the first sign of Xi Jinping being breaking away from traditional robotic, you
[Guest]: know, black dyed, gelled head Chinese leaders who are very morose to somebody who's charismatic,
[Guest]: who wants to sort of connect with the people and who also wants to present a picture to
[Guest]: the outside world of China being different and changing and becoming far more active.
[Guest]: So it's a little bit of Xi Jinping's personality himself when he was nominated as a successor
[Guest]: in 2007, 2008.
[Guest]: Nobody really saw him as this charismatic individual, but as he takes power in 2012,
[Guest]: 2013, you see him launch this notion of the Chinese dream.
[Guest]: And that is the first sign of Xi Jinping being a man of the people.
[Guest]: He subsequently launches a massive corruption crackdown.
[Guest]: And that corruption crackdown has a lot of public support because of the preceding years,
[Guest]: there's a lot of criticism of corruption in China domestically.
[Guest]: People are annoyed with sort of venal Communist Party leaders who are keeping, maintaining
[Guest]: concubines, taking money outside the country, living luxurious lifestyles.
[Guest]: There are certain scandals which come out and all this sort of builds this momentum
[Guest]: against corruption.
[Guest]: Xi Jinping leverages that and like every other Chinese leader launches a corruption campaign.
[Guest]: It's just that his is far more sharper and the edge is targeted at corruption and also
[Guest]: at political opponents.
[Guest]: Xi Jinping doesn't have a clear defined political opponent because he's not really part of any
[Guest]: of the established factions in Chinese political system.
[Guest]: So Xi Jinping is sort of an outsider.
[Guest]: He doesn't necessarily have, he's not a member of any of the established factions that dominate
[Guest]: the Chinese political system.
[Guest]: And that's one of the reasons why he was a consensus candidate when he was chosen in
[Guest]: 2007, 2008.
[Guest]: But when he takes power, he sort of starts to take the knees out of both the factions,
[Guest]: both the dominating factions.
[Guest]: He also starts to take the knees out of the oil grouping, the bureaucrats who are in the
[Guest]: oil industry.
[Guest]: And he takes, he hits at some of the seriously prominent figures who just left their positions
[Guest]: of power.
[Guest]: And that sort of sends a chill down the political system and the bureaucracy and allows him
[Guest]: to further consolidate his power.
[Guest]: His first five years have been extremely, were extremely critical.
[Guest]: And the fact that he had, he managed to get things done and consolidate himself in the
[Guest]: position that he has, that he now has his name in the Chinese constitution and the party's
[Guest]: constitution right alongside Mao Zedong, because Mao Zedong in the constitution has a thought.
[Guest]: It's called Mao Zedong thought.
[Guest]: And Xi Jinping has a thought.
[Guest]: Other leaders have theories.
[Guest]: In the Chinese parlance, thought is greater than theory.
[Guest]: So Xi Jinping is at par with Mao right now.
[Guest]: And therefore he's got the freedom to try and pursue a far more expressive and expansive
[Guest]: foreign policy.
[Guest]: And he does that, right?
[Guest]: He launches Belt and Road in 2013.
[Guest]: He establishes the AIIB, the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.
[Guest]: He strengthens the Shanghai Cooperation Organization grouping.
[Guest]: Today, India and Pakistan are parts of that grouping.
[Guest]: And he starts to express himself far more broadly on the international stage.
[Guest]: China now has its own narrative on human rights.
[Guest]: China has its own narrative on economic globalization, which has gotten particularly more prominent
[Guest]: after Donald Trump in the US.
[Guest]: And this is where sort of Xi Jinping's foreign policy is leading.
[Guest]: It's about establishing China as a big country, not just from an external viewer's point of
[Guest]: view, but also internalizing it within the Chinese system that we are a big country and
[Guest]: we need to be there for acting like a big country.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, on the one hand, it might seem as if China's foreign policy is sort of evolving
[Amit Varma]: with the state of the country itself.
[Amit Varma]: That you know, first, it's not really a superpower, you know, through the 70s, 80s, 90s, whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So they bide their time as they gradually build, you know, in 96, Jiang talks about
[Amit Varma]: the five principles of peaceful coexistence.
[Amit Varma]: And at that point, they're not really asserting themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And then as China gets economically more powerful, they sort of assert themselves, I guess, that's
[Amit Varma]: one way of looking at it.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, just thinking about my question to you also is about how big a role domestic
[Amit Varma]: political imperatives play in shaping the foreign policy of Xi, for example, just to
[Amit Varma]: sort of draw an analogy, if you sort of look at how Indira Gandhi came to power, where
[Amit Varma]: she was also like a kind of a compromise candidate, you know, the party, senior folks thought
[Amit Varma]: she'll be easy to control, they called her a goongi guria.
[Amit Varma]: And then because of the political imperative of having to distinguish herself, she turned
[Amit Varma]: sharply left, and, you know, carried out a series of economic measures like bank nationalizations,
[Amit Varma]: FARA, all those labor laws which came up, which basically devastated the country.
[Amit Varma]: And those were not driven by that bad economics was not driven by a belief in economics in
[Amit Varma]: that that economics per se, but just to distinguish herself politically, from her rivals and carve
[Amit Varma]: out that niche.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, I wonder how much of the assertive foreign policy under Xi comes from this necessity
[Amit Varma]: for him to also carve out that space in China's new modern mythology, like first, of course,
[Amit Varma]: he consolidates power using the corruption campaign, gets rid of his rivals, and gradually
[Amit Varma]: power consolidates more and more under him till now, you say, as you say, his name is
[Amit Varma]: in the Constitution.
[Amit Varma]: But does a lot of this assertiveness also have to do with the man himself and the local
[Amit Varma]: incentives which are driving his geopolitical moves?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, that's an interesting question, right? And often this gets missed.
[Guest]: So when it comes to the man himself, I mean, it's very difficult, obviously, to paint a
[Guest]: picture of the man himself, given that the system is so big.
[Guest]: But from the sense that we get is that Xi Jinping himself sees himself as a man of destiny
[Guest]: in many ways.
[Guest]: He has a strong sense of history, and he has a strong sense of the need for the party to
[Guest]: sustain.
[Guest]: If you look at what is now known as Xi Jinping thought on diplomacy, the first point of Xi
[Guest]: Jinping thought on diplomacy is the first objective is to uphold the centralized and
[Guest]: unified leadership of the Communist Party of China.
[Guest]: The second of those is to pursue diplomacy to realize national rejuvenation.
[Guest]: Both of those are essentially domestic objectives.
[Guest]: You are looking at maintaining economic growth, ensuring expansion of Chinese national power
[Guest]: to be able to not just fuel national pride and all of that, but also to improve the lot
[Guest]: of the people in the country, but also through that legitimized party rule.
[Guest]: So economic growth, economic development is fundamental to what his foreign policy has
[Guest]: been.
[Guest]: And one of the biggest drivers of this Belt and Road Initiative, which is essentially
[Guest]: now characterizes his entire foreign policy, because BRI is everything and nothing in many
[Guest]: ways, is that you need to be able to find new markets, you need to diversify your markets,
[Guest]: you need to be able to shift capacity from China, economic capacity from China to other
[Guest]: places while ensuring that you don't necessarily lose jobs.
[Guest]: And in that process, you need to also create China as a consumer market because the economy
[Guest]: needs to grow through consumption.
[Guest]: So therefore, the manufacturing also needs to shift somewhere else because you're also
[Guest]: dealing with issues of rising wage, labor costs and those sorts of things.
[Guest]: So all of these objectives are what define BRI.
[Guest]: One of the other objectives of BRI is to ensure that China's energy needs are met and its
[Guest]: energy sources are diversified, because there's a lot of fear over the years, there's been
[Guest]: lots of fear about the sea lanes of communication being blockaded in case of conflict.
[Guest]: And that as a vulnerability has also led to some thought of, well, we need to develop
[Guest]: pipelines and land routes, which are better.
[Guest]: So a number of domestic objectives, but the primary domestic objective is to ensure that
[Guest]: the party sustains.
[Guest]: And the argument that Xi Jinping supporters will give you is that the corruption campaign
[Guest]: and the rest of it, the political persecution, has been a lot about ensuring that the party
[Guest]: survives because the party had become so corrupt and venal that it was extremely difficult
[Guest]: for it to survive.
[Guest]: It was losing legitimacy among the public.
[Guest]: And therefore, you had to do something like this in order to create that sense of legitimacy.
[Guest]: The nationalism that he's further stirred, because Xi Jinping talks a lot about the century
[Guest]: of humiliation, and he talks a lot about Chinese national rejuvenation, which is his predominant
[Guest]: objective.
[Guest]: It all sort of harks back to this idea that we were once a great power, we've lost our
[Guest]: way and we are now finding a way.
[Guest]: And the only way for us to head in that direction of becoming this massive international power
[Guest]: is by the leadership of the Communist Party.
[Guest]: And therefore, he puts his record in front of you saying that in 70 years of the Communist
[Guest]: Party's rule, we've seen a record number of people being lifted out of poverty.
[Guest]: We've seen China's national power increase.
[Guest]: So a lot of this also, when you're sort of expressing yourself at the international stage,
[Guest]: is a signal to your domestic constituency that this is what we have achieved, that today
[Guest]: we have a say at that table.
[Guest]: Previously, nobody cared.
[Guest]: We were a poor country, but today we've grown and we've grown because the party has been
[Guest]: unified.
[Guest]: So the domestic drivers of his foreign policy are predominantly these, in terms of his own
[Guest]: sense of his own history.
[Guest]: He brings that into play on occasion when he talks about...
[Guest]: So just in the last year, you had lots of celebrations leading up to the 70th anniversary
[Guest]: of the PRC, which was on October 1st.
[Guest]: You had lots of museums which were hosting sort of exhibitions, and you could see that
[Guest]: Xi Jinping's father was prominently displayed, particularly at the National Museum in Beijing.
[Guest]: And his role in leading economic reform in the 1990s was played up.
[Guest]: Because often when we talk about Deng Xiaoping, we forget about some of the other people who
[Guest]: came in the picture and who led some of these things.
[Guest]: And Xi Jinping's father's work in Southern China was extremely important to kick-starting
[Guest]: economic reform in the 1990s after what happened in Tiananmen Square.
[Guest]: And that was prominently displayed.
[Guest]: This idea of him being a princeling, not necessarily a princeling in the context of somebody who
[Guest]: comes from a well-off background, but somebody who has deep connections with the party's
[Guest]: original aspirations, is played out quite frequently.
[Guest]: Because Xi Jinping does this, right?
[Guest]: So in the last one year, you've seen him repeatedly talk about an education program across not
[Guest]: just society, but also the party, about upholding and reaffirming our original aspirations.
[Guest]: Remember the original aspiration of the Communist Party.
[Guest]: And him going to these old Communist Party foundation sites and paying homage is basically
[Guest]: signaling that I am in line with these ancestors, with these guys who came in the past.
[Guest]: I am a man of history who understands this.
[Guest]: And this is my historic mission that China has stood up.
[Guest]: It has grown rich.
[Guest]: And today, under me, it will grow strong.
[Guest]: And that's where we can gauge how he sees his place in history, right?
[Amit Varma]: And is it fair to say that in the last few years, as China has grown economically and
[Amit Varma]: as markets have functioned there within the parameters set for them, and people have been
[Amit Varma]: empowered within those parameters, is it also fair to say that, one, the party has also
[Amit Varma]: grown stronger within China, and two, that Xi himself has grown stronger within the party?
[Guest]: Yeah, so the bit about the party growing stronger in China is a little bit of a tricky question,
[Guest]: because in many ways, the party's reach has expanded, whether the legitimacy expanded
[Guest]: is another issue.
[Guest]: The reach has definitely expanded.
[Guest]: So Xi Jinping has made sure that the party now is supreme.
[Guest]: I mean, in his speech at the 19th Party Congress, which is a five yearly meeting of the leadership
[Guest]: of the party across the country, one of the things that he said was that the party sort
[Guest]: of, I'm paraphrasing, but essentially what he said was that the party sort of has control
[Guest]: over all corners, the North, East, South and West.
[Guest]: Essentially, he emphasizes the primacy of the party over the primacy of the state, which
[Guest]: in many ways is sort of a slight bit of a shift from what was happening since Deng Xiaoping's
[Guest]: reform started.
[Guest]: Under Deng Xiaoping's reform, you were trying to create a division between the party and
[Guest]: state while maintaining certain linkages.
[Guest]: The division was a state acts as an executionary authority, which executes things, which does
[Guest]: things professionally, whereas the party pursues ideology, some degree of control and those
[Guest]: sorts of things.
[Guest]: But you wanted to create more professionalism as opposed to more ideologically driven operations.
[Guest]: Under Xi Jinping, he started to sort of remove that bit of linkage, that bit of discrimination.
[Guest]: He started to create a linkage, deeper linkage between the party and the state.
[Guest]: So more party organs now take care of more state institutions.
[Guest]: Xi Jinping himself sort of commands a number of central leading groups, which end up creating
[Guest]: policy, which the state then implements.
[Guest]: So the state from being a policy actor in many ways has been increasingly reduced to
[Guest]: just an executor.
[Guest]: Under Deng Xiaoping's reform, the state had some role to play in policy formation, policy
[Guest]: acting, state institutions were doing that.
[Guest]: Today, the state is far less important in that sense, and the party is far more important.
[Guest]: His control in that sense has increased, but not just at the state level.
[Guest]: But if you look at, say, private enterprises, under Xi Jinping, there's been a greater focus
[Guest]: on establishing party cells in private enterprises.
[Guest]: Party cells always existed, but their role was sort of acting as this sort of liaising
[Guest]: authority between a private company and the government and sort of the political leadership.
[Guest]: If you think of it at a, say, local city level, I'm a private company's CEO, I run a technology
[Guest]: business, and it's useful for me to have a party cell because it can help me get some
[Guest]: sort of political patronage within my local government and that sort of things.
[Guest]: But increasingly, that was the role that they were traditionally performing, trying to build
[Guest]: certain party building activities and act as a link between the party and enterprises.
[Guest]: But increasingly, there has been effort to change the articles of association of companies
[Guest]: to make sure that the party cells have far more decision-making role to play in these
[Guest]: companies.
[Guest]: They provide guidance and direction far more.
[Guest]: And that sort of led to some degree of backlash internationally also.
[Guest]: Today, this conversation that we see around Huawei and Chinese private companies being
[Guest]: state actors essentially has to do with this assertion that Xi Jinping has made where the
[Guest]: party cells have become far more active in private enterprises.
[Guest]: Across society also, yes, you will have party groupings, party meetings, and they've become
[Guest]: far more ideological, far more active in that sense.
[Guest]: So in that sense, yes, the party has regained far more control.
[Guest]: It's become far stronger, far more rejuvenated.
[Guest]: But the issue is, can this sense of centralized rejuvenation of the party and reaffirmation
[Guest]: of ideology really enthuse your grassroots workers?
[Guest]: It's not necessarily the case, right?
[Guest]: Because there's an old saying in China, which is, the heaven is high above and the emperor
[Guest]: is far away.
[Guest]: And therefore, it tells you that people at grassroots level, at provincial levels, at
[Guest]: village levels, at district levels, you realize that, well, yes, okay, he wants me to do some
[Guest]: of these things and he's pushing for this, and this is the party's direction and guidance,
[Guest]: but I have my interests.
[Guest]: So therefore, you get things like data being faked, you get information being misreported.
[Guest]: And therefore, if you see, often the central leadership of the party sends a lot of inspection
[Guest]: teams around the country.
[Guest]: So on things like pollution, on things like business report, business data, on things
[Guest]: like whether certain policies of central government have been implemented, you have constantly
[Guest]: inspection teams from the central leadership going across the country and conducting inspections.
[Guest]: You wouldn't need to do that if everything was functioning so smoothly and everybody
[Guest]: was so ideologically and interest-wise aligned.
[Guest]: And repeatedly, if you look at Xi Jinping's speeches on domestic politics, he is constantly
[Guest]: talking about the need for party branches across all levels to follow the bottom line
[Guest]: and the unified leadership of the central leadership.
[Guest]: The reason that you emphasize it again and again is because it's not happening.
[Guest]: And that's a challenge for him.
[Guest]: But that's his objective, right?
[Guest]: To expand central control, to ensure that the party becomes stronger than the state,
[Guest]: which it has, and also to expand the party's reach beyond its traditional spheres of influence.
[Amit Varma]: And on the question of foreign policy, would it be fair to say that while he is more assertive
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, China's interests and so on, it is also the case that he sees the world
[Amit Varma]: not in a zero-sum way as some geopolitical actors might see it as, for example, the US
[Amit Varma]: President Trump certainly seems to see it, but in a more non-zero-sum way that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: let's help each other.
[Amit Varma]: We can all grow.
[Amit Varma]: This is what we want.
[Amit Varma]: We can all do this.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we get what we want.
[Amit Varma]: We'll try to help you along the way as well.
[Amit Varma]: Is that sort of more of how he sees the world?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I think Chinese foreign policy, when you compare him to Donald Trump, of course,
[Guest]: he's a saint.
[Guest]: He's far more nuanced.
[Guest]: But he's far more thoughtful, far more nuanced.
[Guest]: And his approach has been far more adaptable in many ways.
[Guest]: So if you look at India's relationship with China or China's relationship with Japan over
[Guest]: the last six, seven years, there was a steady downward trend until things with the US and
[Guest]: China became far more prickly.
[Guest]: And then you see China adapt.
[Guest]: It's adapting to its neighbors.
[Guest]: It's starting to become much more softer.
[Guest]: Its foreign policy rhetoric is constantly about win-win relationships and denying the
[Guest]: Cold War mentality.
[Guest]: To me, that's a lot of rhetoric.
[Guest]: There is a sense of win-win broadly means, yes, you can win, but I must win more.
[Guest]: And that's how it usually functions.
[Guest]: And it's very cognizant of the fact that it's a large player.
[Guest]: So there is some strand of thought in China which talks about the fact that, look, as
[Guest]: a growing power, we need to also be far more cognizant of the fact that we can't be only
[Guest]: winning all the time.
[Guest]: There are times where we need to be a little bit more benevolent in our approach.
[Guest]: And there are times where we need to give on some things.
[Guest]: But it's really difficult given the sort of mercantilist sort of culture, where you're
[Guest]: looking at gaining much more from each transaction.
[Guest]: If you look at the belt in the road over the last couple of years, what you will see is
[Guest]: that there are two strands of conversation.
[Guest]: One is about China's trapping people in debt, trapping states in debt in order to then extract
[Guest]: strategic or geopolitical advantages, geopolitical concessions.
[Guest]: Humber and Toto is one example that people will keep talking about.
[Guest]: The other strand of thought is that, well, you might have given all this debt and the
[Guest]: state has to pay you back so much.
[Guest]: But what if the state doesn't pay you back and then drills up nationalism to say that,
[Guest]: you know, we're not giving back territory, we're not doing this.
[Guest]: And given the sort of pushback that some of the things are happening, what is your negotiating
[Guest]: capacity with that state?
[Guest]: And in many cases, what we've seen, particularly in Africa, is that the Chinese have had to
[Guest]: undergo debt restructuring again and again.
[Guest]: And they've had to sort of forgive and let go of certain amount of debt.
[Guest]: They've had to restructure certain debt.
[Guest]: They've had to expand time periods for loan payments while forgiving certain percentages.
[Guest]: So the question of what their capacity would be and whether they are looking at singularly
[Guest]: I win and you lose or whether they're looking at partnerships in which they can also gain
[Guest]: in the long term is to be sort of seriously thought about.
[Guest]: And to my knowledge, to my understanding, the Chinese are looking at it from a long
[Guest]: term point of view.
[Guest]: They're looking at, you know, their investments abroad.
[Guest]: They're looking at, you know, BRI.
[Guest]: They're looking at their competition with the US from a long term perspective.
[Guest]: In that, you will be making tactical shifts, you will be making short term adjustments.
[Guest]: But you're looking at a long term perspective saying that if we need to establish our sort
[Guest]: of presence across this broader Asia Pacific to begin with, and then going forward globally,
[Guest]: caution we need to act with a certain degree of sense.
[Guest]: And in that they've made a lot of mistakes.
[Guest]: So Huawei is a particular mistake.
[Guest]: The focus on Communist Party sales in private companies is a particular mistake.
[Guest]: And it's a far more aggressive diplomatic attitude.
[Guest]: Chinese diplomats have become some of the most brutish individuals in the diplomatic
[Guest]: community, whether it was the former DCM in Pakistan, who took to very sort of very limited
[Guest]: Twitter diplomacy, or the former ambassador to Canada, who in the case of this Huawei
[Guest]: CFO had been particularly harsh, particularly undiplomatic in his language, or others, they've
[Guest]: been changed, their attitude has changed to becoming far more aggressive.
[Guest]: I'm not saying that they wouldn't see it as zero sum, there are certain places where you
[Guest]: see it as zero sum.
[Guest]: But the long term vision is that we need to be doing things to expand our presence, our
[Guest]: scope of interest and our capacity to deal with challenges around the world.
[Guest]: Because our interests are now truly global.
[Guest]: And in that you will see times where they've made serious mistakes.
[Guest]: So during Doklam, they've made serious mistakes with India.
[Guest]: But you will also see an adaptability.
[Amit Varma]: That's a mixed record, I'd say.
[Amit Varma]: Right, let's go in for a quick commercial break now.
[Amit Varma]: And when we come back from the break, let's talk about the China India relationship in
[Amit Varma]: particular how that has evolved and where we stand today.
[Unknown]: Hi, everybody, welcome to another awesome week on the IBM podcast network.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please make sure you do.
[Unknown]: We're IBM podcast on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram.
[Unknown]: I also kind of wanted to make a couple of other announcements.
[Unknown]: Right.
[Unknown]: So first, as I think I mentioned last week, I just want to kind of reiterate, we're going
[Unknown]: to be closing our SoundCloud channel at the end of this month.
[Unknown]: So if this is where you're hearing us, please maybe try and listen to us on something else.
[Unknown]: Maybe the IBM podcast app, maybe another app, we're on all kinds of different platforms.
[Unknown]: The other thing is a little happier, right?
[Unknown]: So for the first time ever in Asia, we have a podcasting award for shows made in Asia.
[Unknown]: And we're very happy to announce that a number of our shows have been nominated.
[Unknown]: Besa Besa, Tech Careers in the New, Varta Lab and Chunni One have all been nominated
[Unknown]: for these awards.
[Unknown]: Please go to the website AsianPodcastAwards.com and go vote for our shows.
[Unknown]: Come on, make us win, guys.
[Unknown]: On Cyrus Says This Week, check out the episode we did with the cast of the Upstars, the new
[Unknown]: Netflix series.
[Unknown]: On the Empowering Series, Zarina is joined by stand up comedian Shreeja Chaturvedi.
[Unknown]: On this episode, Shreeja talks about her journey as a stand up comedian, the way she perceives
[Unknown]: her struggles and what makes her feel the most empowered.
[Unknown]: You thought Simplified were done with celebrating their 150th episode?
[Unknown]: Not even close.
[Unknown]: Chuck, Naren and Sreeket are back with the third part of their 150th episode.
[Unknown]: Make sure to tune in to see if your questions are featured.
[Unknown]: On GabyCD, Farhad and Sunetra talk about the evolution through college life and their experiences
[Unknown]: that changed them forever.
[Unknown]: This week on Boundless, Natasha reads the poem calling out all aunties who pressurize
[Unknown]: us to be a certain way and shares her idea of a charming prince.
[Unknown]: On Golgappa, host Tripti is joined by actor and contestant on Big Boss Marathi, Neha Shetole.
[Unknown]: She talks about her experience in the Big Boss house and the politics in it.
[Unknown]: On Feeding 10 Billion, Ramya and Varun talk to food historian Kurush Dalal.
[Unknown]: They delve into the history of our food and how it dictates our future.
[Unknown]: On Agla Station Adulthood, Ayushi and Ritasha talk about celebrating girlhood on Girl Child
[Unknown]: Day.
[Unknown]: Together, they talk about the situation of women and girls in the country and how important
[Unknown]: it is for them to have powerful role models, a sense of freedom and the ability to exercise
[Unknown]: agency.
[Unknown]: On The Habit Coach, Ashton talks about daydreaming and how one must engineer their imagination.
[Unknown]: With that, let's get you onto your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and The Yancey.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Manoj Kevalramani on the question of what does China want and specifically
[Amit Varma]: what India-China relations are like.
[Amit Varma]: And Manoj, I guess it's only meaningful to talk of India-China relationships from the
[Amit Varma]: time that India actually existed.
[Amit Varma]: So shall we sort of go back to independence and talk about the contrasting approaches
[Amit Varma]: of Vallabhbhai Patel and Jawaharlal Nehru to foreign policy, where Patel was more a
[Amit Varma]: practical, real politic kind of guy and Nehru was sort of not.
[Amit Varma]: Can you sort of elaborate on the differences between the two?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I mean, if you look at how India and China both became, you know, how we became
[Guest]: the Republic of India and how they became the People's Republic of China.
[Guest]: China sort of emerges from a very violent, India also has deep violence, but the violence
[Guest]: is different as compared to the Chinese violence.
[Guest]: In China, you see that the Communist Party takes charge and it sort of comes to power
[Guest]: with the barrel of the gun through a civil war, apart from all the colonialism.
[Guest]: There is a civil war which leads to the Communist Party taking charge with a very clear ideology
[Guest]: of communism.
[Guest]: In contrast, in India, you do have some sort of a civil war in some senses, but it's a
[Guest]: little bit different and the violence that you see is based out of partition.
[Guest]: You get divided into two countries.
[Guest]: And but yet, when you see the Indian government, it's sort of under Jawaharlal Nehru, we see
[Guest]: ourselves as an international power.
[Guest]: And we see ourselves as an international power, not just from the point of view of our size
[Guest]: and our capacity, but also in the sense of how we got our independence.
[Guest]: The idea of the Indian independence movement being an example, a methodology that others
[Guest]: can emulate across the world as decolonization begins to happen is something which is deeply
[Guest]: ideological for India.
[Guest]: And we seek to even in some ways export that.
[Guest]: We sort of talk about this idea that India provides this non-aligned idea eventually,
[Guest]: but eventually this anti-colonialism, anti-imperialistic idea of India, which is deeply rooted in our
[Guest]: culture and Gandhi and values and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: Ahimsa, Satyagraha and whatever.
[Guest]: In comparison, in China, you see the notion that strength, the gun is extremely, extremely
[Guest]: important.
[Guest]: So there's a slight divide in firstly how we approach these things.
[Guest]: Secondly, the fact that, like I said in the previous bit of our conversation, that the
[Guest]: Chinese view India with deep suspicion because they view the modern Indian state as a successor
[Guest]: of the British rule in the region.
[Guest]: And therefore, they have the sense that the state is firstly of capitalistic origin with
[Guest]: leaders who are capitalist in their mindset and leaders who are also keen on expanding
[Guest]: a hegemonic presence, whether it be by annexing territory, but expanding the kingdom, expanding
[Guest]: the British Raj essentially going forward.
[Guest]: But the name today is the Republic of India.
[Guest]: And that's their deep suspicion that they harbor.
[Guest]: In contrast, India harbors a mixed sort of approach towards China.
[Guest]: So Nehru is realist in many ways.
[Guest]: He's a realist.
[Guest]: He also sees the fact that there is a state system internationally and the Chinese are
[Guest]: along our borders.
[Guest]: But he also has this fundamental sense of Asian civilization and Asian solidarity.
[Guest]: And even before India becomes independent, we hold this Asian Relations Conference.
[Guest]: And if you listen to Nehru's speech in that conference, it's not a wishy-washy ideologue
[Guest]: who's saying things like Hindi-Chini Bhai Bhai or the Asian civilization is one and together.
[Guest]: He's essentially leveraging that to pitch India as a leader in the region.
[Guest]: And he's obviously in that speech, he's recognizing the fact that there is a state system, there
[Guest]: are state interests, there are different civilizational appeals within the region, and there is a
[Guest]: sense of conflict also.
[Guest]: Yet, there is a broader thing that brings us together.
[Guest]: So he's not completely ignorant of the fact that there are strands of conflict.
[Guest]: And history has told us that Nehru, while he believed in certain things, he was also
[Guest]: a realist.
[Guest]: The distinction between Nehru and Patel comes from the fact that Patel saw the world far
[Guest]: more differently.
[Guest]: Once the PRC, once the Chinese sort of army, the People's Liberation Army moves into Tibet
[Guest]: first in 1950, Patel is extremely worried about that.
[Guest]: He's extremely concerned about that.
[Guest]: And because with that, he sees a fundamental alteration of geography.
[Guest]: He sees the buffer of Tibet, which was essentially a buffer state, going away, and he sees the
[Guest]: Chinese now at our doorstep.
[Guest]: And Patel is very suspicious of that, because he's a hard-nosed realist who believes that
[Guest]: India needs to be pursuing its interests as opposed to looking at cooperation in this
[Guest]: sense.
[Guest]: You can work with partners, but you have certain core interests, and security is fundamental
[Guest]: to that.
[Guest]: And that comes a lot with the job that he's done leading soon into independence and after
[Guest]: that very sort of integrating states and looking at that.
[Guest]: And that sort of plays out in his perception of China, where he talks about China being
[Guest]: a potential threat to India.
[Guest]: And he sort of warns Nehru in a letter that he says that, you know, we've never really
[Guest]: faced the Chinese directly on our border.
[Guest]: The Himalayas have always been this barrier that have prevented civilizations from clashing.
[Guest]: And therefore, that barrier today seems to go away.
[Guest]: And this is going to be problematic for us going forward in the future.
[Guest]: And that's quite a visionary thing to say at that point of time.
[Guest]: Nehru believes that there is ways that we can work with the Chinese together.
[Guest]: And in that, he is taken in by some of the ideas of Asian solidarity.
[Guest]: And that's predominantly because he's looking at this outside world and he's looking at
[Guest]: India as a model externally.
[Guest]: He sort of ignores the immediate threat that could develop.
[Guest]: And because you've ignored the understanding of China or the Chinese leadership of India,
[Guest]: if you had a deeper sense of what the Chinese actually think about or thought about the
[Guest]: Indian administration at that point of time, you'd have probably been far more circumspect
[Guest]: in not cooperating with them, but at least recognizing the fact that there is a distinct
[Guest]: threat that they pose because they view you with hostility, because they view you fundamentally
[Guest]: as problematic.
[Guest]: The value based proposition of the Republic of India, led by the Congress Party at that
[Guest]: point of time, was seen as problematic.
[Guest]: So I think that's where the sort of essential break happens.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you were talking about how China sort of viewed India.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting in Gawor's book, I came across another excerpt, which I'll
[Amit Varma]: just read out, quote, an authoritative classified 1990 Chinese study of the 1962 war trace that
[Amit Varma]: conflict to Nehru's assimilation of the British imperialist mentality and strategy.
[Amit Varma]: Nehru's core ambition was to establish a greater Indian empire within the realm of the old
[Amit Varma]: British Empire and stretching from South East Asia to the Middle East.
[Amit Varma]: Afghanistan, Burma and Tibet were to be buffers within this imperial framework.
[Amit Varma]: The countries around India were to become subservient to Indian power.
[Amit Varma]: Indian security strategy under Nehru was premised on achieving this empire's stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this is obviously not true.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, Nehru definitely did not have this imperialist mindset.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you know, if anything, it was the sort of the opposite.
[Amit Varma]: And in the context of how they obviously viewed him and they viewed India, it's sort of ironic
[Amit Varma]: that his policy through the 50s after Patel died and that real politics sort of went away
[Amit Varma]: has often been, you know, described as appeasement and how he's often been blamed for the 1962
[Amit Varma]: war.
[Amit Varma]: Can you elaborate a little bit on that?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, look, at the end of what was happening was that I mean, to me, yes, the
[Guest]: Indian government has started realizing what was happening with China and Tibet.
[Guest]: Despite whatever was being said and whatever was being done, there were these state visits
[Guest]: that were happening with Zhou Enlai and Nehru talking about building a deeper relationship.
[Guest]: And there was a lot of warmth.
[Guest]: It was still, I don't think Nehru was completely, like I said, he was not cognizant that the
[Guest]: Chinese pose a threat.
[Guest]: It was just about the nature of threat and whether you can contain the threat.
[Guest]: And I think that's where there were a couple of things, right?
[Guest]: Nehru's forward policy leading up to the 1962 war was seen by the Chinese as provocative.
[Guest]: That was one thing.
[Guest]: The other thing was that there was a lack of understanding within India about domestic
[Guest]: processes in Beijing.
[Guest]: Ma Zedong was under tremendous pressure after the failure of the Great Leap Forward, which
[Guest]: is 57-58 onwards.
[Guest]: And that pressure had meant that he had been sidelined in the party, despite him being
[Guest]: the tallest leader.
[Guest]: And this was an opportunity for him to launch a conflict where the party would sort of rally
[Guest]: behind him and he could sort of teach India a lesson.
[Guest]: And this notion of teaching India a lesson comes from the fact that India is a pretender
[Guest]: power in some ways.
[Guest]: It's not a real power.
[Guest]: It's this conglomeration of states which is pulled together with an imperialistic design.
[Guest]: And this notion of this imperialistic Nehru or imperialistic Republic of India comes from
[Guest]: the fact that while we became independent, we were also assimilating princely states
[Guest]: and some of them we did by force.
[Guest]: So all of this was read by the Chinese as seeing India as this imperialist power.
[Guest]: Leading up to the conflict, essentially, yes, there was appeasement.
[Guest]: I think we could have taken a much tougher position on the Chinese.
[Guest]: But the question is, within the geopolitics of the time, what sort of a position could
[Guest]: you have taken which would have been tougher?
[Guest]: You adopted a policy to buttress your borders and that was seen as confrontational.
[Guest]: The mistake to me was not necessarily the appeasement as what is defined as appeasement.
[Guest]: The mistake to me in 1962 was in some ways, there was a fundamental belief that there
[Guest]: would be no conflict because these two countries have a shared history of anti-colonialism,
[Guest]: which was problematic firstly, because you did not recognize the strands of nationalism
[Guest]: that and the strands of domestic political turmoil that were developing within China.
[Guest]: The second mistake was not to actually focus on wartime preparation and to invest in that.
[Guest]: And you can take that back to again this broader sense of conflict receding because colonialism
[Guest]: is happening, things are changing, although the world may still be a volatile place and
[Guest]: India having to sort of be a beacon of that hope in that sense.
[Guest]: Then there were a couple of strands which led to that, but a lot of it to me leads down
[Guest]: to a lack of understanding of Chinese domestic politics and the systems that were underplay,
[Guest]: the sort of the pulls and pushes underplay within the Chinese system itself.
[Guest]: I don't think it was appeasement which led to the conflict.
[Guest]: The Chinese had very clear objectives.
[Guest]: We just didn't understand those objectives.
[Guest]: Because if the Chinese had territorial objectives, predominantly they walked back from most of
[Guest]: the territory that they conquered.
[Guest]: They kept some chunks, but they essentially walked back from most of it.
[Guest]: So the objective was essentially like they said later on was to teach India a lesson.
[Guest]: And that has a lot to do with Chinese perception of India back then.
[Guest]: And some of those strands of perception continue even till today, although a lot has changed
[Amit Varma]: since then.
[Amit Varma]: And all of this, of course, is playing out in the geopolitical context of the Cold War,
[Amit Varma]: which is also evolving.
[Amit Varma]: Like the way sort of China was forced to look at the world was through this prism of, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the communist versus the imperialist on one side, Soviet versus the USA, East versus
[Amit Varma]: West.
[Amit Varma]: And so it's a very bipolar kind of view of the world.
[Amit Varma]: But India isn't exactly fitting into this framework because, you know, Nehru is trying
[Amit Varma]: to be non-aligned and he's trying all of this other stuff.
[Amit Varma]: And during this time in the 50s in China, also Koji's up to Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: How is all of that evolving during that period?
[Guest]: So what you see at that point of time is that this is again one of these things which is
[Guest]: often not remembered is that in the 1950s, China wasn't cozying up to Pakistan.
[Guest]: China was cozying up to India.
[Guest]: In fact, they were looking at some sort of and there was another standard of thought
[Guest]: where Pakistan wanted to work with India in order to sort of balance China.
[Guest]: So there were these multiple different strands of thought up in the air.
[Guest]: There were lots of different things happening.
[Guest]: For the Chinese, the broad perspective was this, right?
[Guest]: You had just emerged from a brutal period to having a unified state again.
[Guest]: In some of those things, in some of the further territories, you needed to still unify a lot
[Guest]: of things.
[Guest]: You need to conquer some lands also.
[Guest]: You had a partner in the Soviet Union, but your partnership with the Soviet Union has
[Guest]: started to increasingly become far more shaky from, say, the mid 50s going on till the Cultural
[Guest]: Revolution is launched.
[Guest]: And that starts to become your primary threat.
[Guest]: And that threat in more than, say, the West, that becomes your primary threat.
[Guest]: And in that, subsequently, you end up developing a partnership with the US.
[Guest]: With regard to India, this is what you see, right?
[Guest]: You see Asia, essentially, you begin to see Asia as your sphere of influence.
[Guest]: And you see an active India as problematic in that sense.
[Guest]: I don't think at that point in time, Mao Zedong really had this sense of broader Chinese domination
[Guest]: over Asia.
[Guest]: He was looking at consolidating the state that he'd got.
[Guest]: He was looking at promoting revolution.
[Guest]: He was looking at promoting an ideological foreign policy while keeping China intact.
[Guest]: And in that sort of a sense, he starts to do things like supporting revolutionary movements
[Guest]: in different parts of the world, even in India.
[Guest]: So post the 1962 war also, through much of the Cold War, China supports a number of revolutionary
[Guest]: Maoist terrorist movements in India, secessionist movements in India, through small arms, through
[Guest]: training.
[Guest]: A lot of it has to do with the northeast of India.
[Guest]: And they work on this policy with India, because the idea is that you can't have two really
[Guest]: strong powers dominating Asia.
[Guest]: Japan is recovering from devastation.
[Guest]: So you're not really immediately worried about Japan.
[Guest]: But all this sort of starts to change as the Cold War begins to wind down, as the 70s and
[Guest]: the 80s come into play and China's relationship with the US changes.
[Guest]: But this relationship with India still continues to remain very, very difficult because of
[Guest]: this long persisting boundary dispute and the sense of each other's anxiety.
[Guest]: And the sort of suspicion with each other's broader motives.
[Guest]: China sees India as somebody who does not want to see any extra regional power playing
[Guest]: any role in South Asia, particularly the Chinese.
[Guest]: And India sees China as this block as China's relationship with Pakistan develops as a power
[Guest]: that is not just threatening on its own border, but is also supporting a rival state, which
[Guest]: is hell bent on bleeding India eventually.
[Guest]: So I think that's where the fundamental battle lines get drawn going forward.
[Amit Varma]: I want to therefore take that opportunity to move on to sort of the first flashpoint
[Amit Varma]: between India and China, which was really Tibet in which, you know, both the countries
[Amit Varma]: had a strategic interest.
[Amit Varma]: So there's this famous 1956 talk by Mao Tse Tung, which is widely quoted in which I'll
[Amit Varma]: also quote from where he's sort of giving while he's against Han chauvinism, Han, of
[Amit Varma]: course, are the majority people of China, while he's against Han chauvinism, he's giving
[Amit Varma]: a rationale here for what appears to be a kind of imperialism where he says, quote,
[Amit Varma]: the national minority areas are extensive and rich in resources.
[Amit Varma]: While the Han nationality has a large population, the national minority areas have riches under
[Amit Varma]: the soil that are needed for building socialism.
[Amit Varma]: The Han nationality must actively assist the national minorities to carry out socialist
[Amit Varma]: economic, socialist economic and cultural construction and by improving relations between
[Amit Varma]: the nationalities, mobilize all elements, both human and material, which are beneficial
[Amit Varma]: to socialist construction.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote where basically he's using, you know, socialism as a rationale for what basically
[Amit Varma]: seems to be imperialism, sort of like you, you spoke about the Middle Kingdom with concentric
[Amit Varma]: circles going outwards.
[Amit Varma]: And this probably seems to be the first of the circles.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, India has a bit of an interest in Tibet as well, because they see
[Amit Varma]: it as part of their sphere of cultural influence.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Buddhism was carried to Tibet to begin with by missionaries from India.
[Amit Varma]: So this is not something that, you know, the Chinese invasion of Tibet doesn't really go
[Amit Varma]: down well.
[Amit Varma]: And this is an issue that festers for decades.
[Amit Varma]: Can you tell me a little bit about the evolution of, you know, this whole issue?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I think from a so from a Chinese perspective, some of the areas of ethnic minorities
[Guest]: or the national minorities, as they call them, have to do with resources, have also got to
[Guest]: do with frontier security.
[Guest]: So for example, Xinjiang is one area where again, you've got resources of gas and energy,
[Guest]: but you've also got frontier security as one problem with regard to terrorism and so on
[Guest]: and so forth.
[Guest]: But say in the specific context of Tibet, again, the Chinese state sort of saw Tibet
[Guest]: as a part of Qing China.
[Guest]: It was seen as a part of Qing China and there were periods of time where Tibet was sort
[Guest]: of, you know, in some ways a tributary state and there were periods of time where it was
[Guest]: far more dominant than what the Chinese dynasty was.
[Guest]: So there was never really a part of, okay, this is the empire and Tibet is well integrated
[Guest]: into the empire.
[Guest]: So there were different times where there was an ebb and flow in the history of Tibet.
[Guest]: But there were deep linkages with, say, the Chinese dynasties.
[Guest]: And therefore you saw this as a part of broader China and as a part of the modern Chinese
[Guest]: state.
[Guest]: So they wanted to exercise direct control over this.
[Guest]: They started doing this very early on, soon after taking power in 1949.
[Guest]: In 1950, when this first sort of conversation begins and you start to create some sort of
[Guest]: PLA presence in Tibet to try and annex it.
[Guest]: Subsequently in 1959, you crush everything and you take full control of Tibet and you
[Guest]: establish a communist party rule in full sort of capacity in Tibet.
[Guest]: And then what that does essentially is that it creates sort of, there are two strands
[Guest]: of conflict which are created.
[Guest]: One is with India, where this traditional buffer, which was sort of an easer, which
[Guest]: sort of eased the tension and eased the sort of standoff, face-off between the two massive
[Guest]: states in the region goes away.
[Guest]: And therefore they are now face to face.
[Guest]: And that will inherently bring its own frictions.
[Guest]: The second is that the fleeing of the Dalai Lama to India and India giving him refuge
[Guest]: creates long term unsustainable problem between the two states, where the Dalai Lama essentially,
[Guest]: eventually you set up this Tibetan government in exile in India.
[Guest]: And that becomes a sore spot of friction.
[Guest]: India post the 1962 war with China continues to support the Tibetan movement through covert
[Guest]: means and there is enough documentary evidence to suggest that with the help of the US, we
[Guest]: try to support Tibetan revolution in China.
[Guest]: And the Chinese don't take that well.
[Guest]: They are obviously also doing their own sort of nefarious activities in the east of India.
[Guest]: But so is the Indian state doing certain things.
[Guest]: And that's the problem continues till today because despite India having recognized that
[Guest]: Tibet is part of China formally, we do recognize that.
[Guest]: We did that under Jawaharlal Nehru himself.
[Guest]: Yet that led to a conflict and the fleeing of the Dalai Lama was a crucial part of that
[Guest]: conflict because it deepened this suspicion that India has designs over Tibet.
[Guest]: Because it would then say that this is part of our cultural influence and while it can
[Guest]: be independent, yet it becomes sort of a protectorate of India in one way or the other.
[Guest]: And this suspicion sort of grows deeper.
[Guest]: India signs these treaties with Bhutan.
[Guest]: Eventually we annex Sikkim and Sikkim becomes a part of the Republic of India.
[Guest]: India has a treaty with Nepal which sort of essentially creates Nepal as Bhutan and Nepal
[Guest]: becomes sort of junior partners to India in many which ways.
[Guest]: And that is a sort of sense that fuels Chinese anxiety that this is Indian imperialism which
[Guest]: wants to enter and which wants to target Tibet, particularly because of its deep cultural
[Guest]: linkages, the fact that they are now hosting the Dalai Lama is a bigger problem for the
[Guest]: Chinese and therefore the Chinese see Tibet as historically a part of China and therefore
[Guest]: it must be integrated.
[Guest]: And historically while the linkages might have been weak, it was a part of China.
[Guest]: That is a sort of historical narrative that the PRC holds firm to.
[Guest]: The reality is that there were historical linkages but Tibet was never necessarily a
[Guest]: part of the Chinese Empire.
[Guest]: And I think that's the reason why this continues so far is again this sense that the PRC has
[Guest]: struggled to maintain its control over Tibet.
[Guest]: They have securitized the region heavily.
[Guest]: They have tried to undermine religion.
[Guest]: They have tried to undermine language.
[Guest]: They have tried to undermine the sense of autonomy in many ways to try and promote integration.
[Guest]: That periodically has led to backlashes.
[Guest]: The 14th Dalai Lama has been extremely popular internationally in his ability to mobilize
[Guest]: public opinion and the fact that he stays in India and there is a Tibetan government
[Guest]: in exile in India continues to be a sore spot between the two countries because the Chinese
[Guest]: then believe, then argue that well you are not respecting our core interests.
[Guest]: And the Indian argument in return is that look he's a refugee who's living in India.
[Guest]: He's a religious leader.
[Guest]: It's a religious movement which we can't stop.
[Guest]: We're a democracy.
[Guest]: Politically we recognize that we abide by the one China principle.
[Guest]: So we therefore acknowledge that Tibet is part of China also.
[Guest]: So politically we're not really saying anything against that.
[Guest]: But he's living here as an exile.
[Guest]: It's part of our policy that he can live here and it's a religious movement.
[Guest]: So we don't interfere in matters of religion.
[Guest]: The Chinese obviously don't buy that argument.
[Guest]: And therefore it continues to be a sore spot.
[Guest]: And in fact it's going to probably be once again one of the most difficult issues between
[Guest]: the two sides given the Dalai Lama's failing health.
[Guest]: There's going to be issues about succession.
[Guest]: There's going to be issues about religion, politics colliding with each other and whether
[Guest]: you have a new Dalai Lama who is appointed as a successor by the current Dalai Lama,
[Guest]: whether he's an Indian national, whether he's born in India, whether he's living in India,
[Guest]: or whether it's a he or a she, and whether the Chinese would want to therefore have their
[Guest]: own system of succession, which they've clearly told India that we will have our own system
[Guest]: and you must respect that.
[Guest]: So therefore it continues to be a massive issue between the two sides.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe it can be like the World Boxing Championship where you have like five, six Dalai Lamas
[Amit Varma]: and they can combine belts and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, as an aside, you mentioned the 14th Dalai Lama.
[Amit Varma]: We're recording this on Monday, the 14th of October.
[Amit Varma]: And there was a nice Twitter thread, which I noticed today morning.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know if it's from today morning by Amitav Ghosh, where he gives this interesting
[Amit Varma]: nugget on Nepal, where he talks about how in the 18th century, when the British Empire
[Amit Varma]: was thinking, was invited by the Pancham Lama to take Nepal under their wing, you know,
[Amit Varma]: they were voluntarily giving themselves up to the empire, the Britishers decided not
[Amit Varma]: to do so because it would piss China off and they wanted to maintain their trade with China,
[Amit Varma]: which was at that time mainly in opium and tea.
[Amit Varma]: Tea of course came from China, though many Indians won't accept this, but that is just
[Amit Varma]: how it is.
[Amit Varma]: And that's interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And you sort of mentioned, you know, and I want to segue from this into our other territorial
[Amit Varma]: disputes and a good way to do that is, you know, you mentioned how Nehru accepted China's
[Amit Varma]: jurisdiction over Tibet.
[Amit Varma]: And the former Foreign Secretary JN Dixit wrote a book in 1999, where he wrote about
[Amit Varma]: this, I'll quote from that quote, the first occasion when we could have negotiated a realistic
[Amit Varma]: deal with China was when Nehru acquiesced with the Chinese resuming their sovereignty
[Amit Varma]: and jurisdiction over Tibet.
[Amit Varma]: We could have told the Chinese that in return for our accepting their resumption of authority
[Amit Varma]: over Tibet, they should confirm the delineation of the Sino-Indian boundary as inherited by
[Amit Varma]: them and us from the British period, we could have and should have demanded the quid pro
[Amit Varma]: quo of their not questioning the delineated boundary of British times and asked them not
[Amit Varma]: to revive any of their tenuous claims on what was Indian territory.
[Amit Varma]: We did not utilize the opportunity, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this partly again plays to the point of perhaps Nehru not being hard nosed enough
[Amit Varma]: had he had that sort of real politic and practical wisdom of say Patel, he he might have just
[Amit Varma]: cut that hard deal.
[Amit Varma]: But tell me a little bit about I mean, from what I understand, correct me if I'm wrong,
[Amit Varma]: we have broadly two ongoing territorial disputes with China.
[Amit Varma]: One of course is in the Northeast, Arunachal Pradesh and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And the other is Aksai Chin.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, the proposal that they put on the table is that they don't fight over
[Amit Varma]: the Northeast anymore and they accept the British boundaries by the McMahon line and
[Amit Varma]: all that as long as we give them Aksai Chin.
[Amit Varma]: And we apparently sort of did not agree to that.
[Amit Varma]: And then that offer is no longer on the table.
[Amit Varma]: Take me through the complicated history of the territorial disputes that we have with
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: So yeah, like you rightly identified, there are so across our eastern boundaries, starting
[Guest]: from the top in the Northeast.
[Guest]: So we've got from say, from Aksai Chin, and not just Aksai Chin, which is a part of the
[Guest]: former state of Jammu and Kashmir, which the Chinese control.
[Guest]: But also there's a certain part which the Pakistanis ceded to China, the Saksham valley,
[Guest]: which is with the Chinese.
[Guest]: And that's being controlled by them.
[Guest]: So that's the dispute around the northern part of India.
[Guest]: Then we come to the middle sector around the boundary around Nepal and that area.
[Guest]: Again, we have territorial disputes over there with the Chinese on certain plots of land.
[Guest]: But those are sort of much better managed and less strategically significant in many
[Guest]: ways.
[Guest]: And then we come down to the Northeast where we've got Arunachal Pradesh and the Makhmau
[Guest]: on line, which is the matter of dispute.
[Guest]: Interestingly, early on, the Chinese didn't necessarily have a big issue with Arunachal
[Guest]: Pradesh.
[Guest]: They didn't really raise that as a major dispute.
[Guest]: In fact, in the early negotiations, there was lots of back and forth about sharing maps,
[Guest]: understanding each other's areas of dispute, understanding each other's claims.
[Guest]: India in the 1950s published a map which outlined certain claims.
[Guest]: The Chinese didn't take kindly to that map because they felt that it was excessive in
[Guest]: terms of what they were claiming as Indian territory.
[Guest]: And you need to think of maps in the context of, they're not just sort of empty pictures.
[Guest]: They create imaginations of territory.
[Guest]: They create imaginations among the public.
[Guest]: And therefore, then to negotiate something away can become very, very complex.
[Guest]: And the Chinese were sort of annoyed with that.
[Guest]: But they never sought to provide clarity on their claims very often.
[Guest]: This idea of what you spoke about a package proposal.
[Guest]: So after the 1962 war, in the 1950s, there was some conversation about sharing maps,
[Guest]: sharing details and about settling our boundary issues, which obviously didn't work out very
[Guest]: well.
[Guest]: Eventually, from 1962 onwards, this conversation stopped.
[Guest]: And there was some stress at the border while each side didn't want to raise the pitch and
[Guest]: one of the last sort of conflicts that happened, where a shot was fired was 1967.
[Guest]: But since then, the border has been maintained peaceful because both sides had other interests.
[Guest]: The Chinese look internally, we looked at other interests externally and internally
[Guest]: post the late 60s and 70s.
[Guest]: And therefore, the border has by and large remained calm.
[Guest]: But in terms of settling this dispute, so the first real movement comes towards this
[Guest]: package proposal that you're talking about.
[Guest]: The first substantial conversation on this that comes out is in the 80s, when Deng Xiaoping
[Guest]: actually offers this package proposal that you're talking about that, you know, in the
[Guest]: Northeast, we sort of gave up what we are claiming, whereas you gave us a side chain
[Guest]: and we just let things end.
[Guest]: And in the middle sector, whatever little bit adjustments need to be made, we can make,
[Guest]: but we can let this end.
[Guest]: And this is to do a lot with Deng Xiaoping's approach of, you know, economic diplomacy.
[Guest]: You want to sort of end political problems and you want to start looking at economic
[Guest]: diplomacy.
[Guest]: Once India sort of says no to this, and there's a reason why India says no to this, because
[Guest]: India's approach to the boundary dispute has been more process driven.
[Guest]: It's been more legalistic and process driven.
[Guest]: And that's quite interesting because our ability to gather historical archival documents and
[Guest]: to present them as matters of our claims is extremely poor compared to what the Chinese
[Guest]: have done.
[Guest]: The Chinese have over the years done far greater archival management, far better archival management.
[Guest]: And therefore, often you will see Chinese diplomats and Chinese foreign ministry spokespeople
[Guest]: and even politicians quoting from archives far more frequently, quoting documents, quoting
[Guest]: accords far more frequently, and accords going back to far, far, many more centuries behind
[Guest]: and data going back to many more centuries behind.
[Guest]: In contrast, our ability to be able to do that is very, very limited because we don't
[Guest]: necessarily have a sort of historical records divisions are very, very poorly managed.
[Guest]: Also, we need to be declassifying some of our archives so that people can actually do
[Guest]: better work on them.
[Guest]: But that's another story.
[Guest]: In terms of the boundary dispute, what starts to happen is that things essentially get ossified.
[Guest]: In 87-88, we had another sort of confrontation in Sun Drang Chu, which is famous now because
[Guest]: after that confrontation, Rajiv Gandhi visits Beijing.
[Guest]: And that's when you start this new period of the Indo-China relationship, where both
[Guest]: sides essentially say formally that our objective is to maintain the boundary peaceful, while
[Guest]: we both focus on other things that we can work together on and also on internal development
[Guest]: issues.
[Guest]: And I think that's where this sort of dispute is even today ossified.
[Guest]: Today, also the issue from our point of view predominantly is this, that we would like
[Guest]: this to be resolved.
[Guest]: But resolution would mean somebody's taking tremendous amount of political capital.
[Guest]: In the 50s, even when Nehru was talking to the parliament, for the political capital
[Guest]: that even he commanded, it seemed extremely difficult for Nehru to give away territory
[Guest]: which had become part of this identity of India.
[Guest]: And that's what happens once you start to very early issue maps, is that you create
[Guest]: this idea and identity of this imagined community.
[Guest]: And that becomes very, very difficult to then give away within the broader public when you
[Guest]: create this identity.
[Guest]: Yet if he couldn't do it back then, there wasn't really a concrete proposal on the table.
[Guest]: There wasn't enough trust to do that back then.
[Guest]: In the 80s, there was a proposal on the table.
[Guest]: We didn't want to give it up because we were following very process driven, legalistic
[Guest]: processes saying that no, but by this statement and by this logic, this is ours and that is
[Guest]: ours.
[Guest]: And the Chinese were saying, look, we're not interested in the details.
[Guest]: The details can be worked out.
[Guest]: Let's agree to a political settlement and we'll move forward.
[Guest]: Yet we were very suspicious of that, partly because yes, Akshaya Chain has strategic value.
[Guest]: But there are certain losses that you need to cut at certain points of time.
[Guest]: And at that point in time, we decided we didn't want to cut those losses.
[Guest]: Today, we're in a position where the Chinese, to my mind, have very little incentive to
[Guest]: settle this.
[Guest]: They enjoy a massive power asymmetry within India.
[Guest]: The economy is five times larger.
[Guest]: They're rapidly modernizing their armed forces.
[Guest]: They're far larger, far stronger, far more equipped armed force than ours.
[Guest]: And I think that poses challenges to us.
[Guest]: And therefore, there is very little incentive for them to settle because they can continue
[Guest]: to keep using the border, maintain it peacefully, but, you know, raise tensions as and when
[Guest]: needed in order to ensure that political messages sent to India that India needs to stay in
[Guest]: line and realize that the Chinese are the bigger power.
[Guest]: And why would you, when you enjoy such an asymmetry, want to settle by giving up some
[Guest]: territory when you no longer need to?
[Amit Varma]: No, and one of the points you made is extremely fascinating because and, you know, I start
[Amit Varma]: to wonder about how we can actually be imprisoned conceptually by the maps that we make.
[Amit Varma]: That once we have made maps which show, you know, Kashmir to be a certain way and Aksai
[Amit Varma]: Chin to be part of India, then it becomes very difficult and we get hardened into those
[Amit Varma]: positions.
[Amit Varma]: Is it true that Aksai Chin also like POK is not actually under our control?
[Guest]: It's basically under Chinese control, right?
[Guest]: It's under Chinese control.
[Guest]: It's not in our control.
[Guest]: There are two chunks of the former state of Jammu and Kashmir, which are no longer in
[Guest]: our control.
[Guest]: And in some ways, I mean, this current abrogation of Article 370, whatever else one can talk
[Guest]: about it, at least from a Chinese point of view, whatever the reaction has been and it's
[Guest]: been played up in the media about being, you know, aggressive and pro-Pakistan and all
[Guest]: of that, which is true, it is pro-Pakistan in some ways.
[Guest]: But the Chinese also see a possibility there, right?
[Guest]: You're redrawing maps, you're redrawing imaginations, you're segregating what is the Kashmir issue
[Guest]: with Pakistan, with what is the Kashmir issue with China.
[Guest]: You're creating new identities, which can then go and negotiate some of the solutions.
[Guest]: So it opens up certain new possibilities, whether those possibilities will lead to a
[Guest]: resolution of the different ballgame.
[Guest]: But it opens up new possibilities because you're redrawing imagination.
[Amit Varma]: And what another thing you said, which also struck me was about how now China being in
[Amit Varma]: this massive position of power has no incentive to settle.
[Amit Varma]: So is it?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, obviously, one of the mature things that both nations have done is that they've
[Amit Varma]: done that boundary conflict management where, you know, battles at the border won't get
[Amit Varma]: out of hand, which is great.
[Amit Varma]: But also that it is in China's interest to sort of hold what is happening in the Northeast
[Amit Varma]: as, you know, a strategic wedge they can use or maybe do the same in with Kashmir, for
[Amit Varma]: example, where it is not in their interest to resolve the issue.
[Guest]: Yeah, in the near term, it's just not in the interest to resolve the issue.
[Guest]: I mean, you've got an India which the Chinese fear would drift into an American orbit, although
[Guest]: that would have its own cost for India and its own sense of perception of itself as a
[Guest]: major power.
[Guest]: But the Chinese fear is that in India that can drift into an American orbit, but also
[Guest]: India that can become vibrant, that can grow rapidly and therefore provide a value based
[Guest]: challenge to the Chinese model, right?
[Guest]: The Chinese model is that a single party unified rule works.
[Guest]: It's provided economic growth.
[Guest]: And for that, you need to make certain political compromises in terms of political liberties
[Guest]: and so on and so forth, social liberties.
[Guest]: A vibrant, democratic, thriving India with sort of the similar amount of people in it,
[Guest]: you know, 1.3, 1.4 billion people, thriving, growing, economically also prospering while
[Guest]: having this democracy, which has its own frictions and everything within it, being a desirable
[Guest]: alternative right next door poses a value based challenge to the Chinese state also,
[Guest]: an ideological challenge to the Chinese state.
[Guest]: So it's useful to keep in India, which has got border disputes, which is slightly conflicted,
[Guest]: which has to therefore keep a watch on certain security imperatives, not just on one side
[Guest]: of its border, but on both sides of its land border.
[Guest]: Whereas you'd want that sort of friction to remain so that you can constantly send India
[Guest]: a message saying, look, if you're going to try and drift in somebody's orbit, which is
[Guest]: our competitor, there are other things that you need to worry about directly.
[Guest]: And you need to then think whether that partner of yours will come and stand by you.
[Guest]: The other thing is that when you keep this land boundary dispute alive with India, you
[Guest]: make sure that India invests its limited resources in defense on ensuring protection of the land
[Guest]: boundary, because that's what your primary threat is.
[Guest]: That leaves the oceans open.
[Guest]: And again, that leaves limited investment, limited focus on the maritime domain.
[Guest]: And that's where the Chinese today want their focus to be.
[Guest]: Their naval development is among the biggest in the world.
[Guest]: They're pumping money by the billions.
[Guest]: They're building new vessels, carriers, and all of those start to operate around the world.
[Guest]: And initially in the near regions, in the near seas and the Pacific Ocean, but increasingly
[Guest]: in the Indian Ocean, which is where a lot of Chinese trade and energy comes from.
[Guest]: So there would you want an India which is stronger, which is focused on naval development,
[Guest]: which is focused on naval partnerships, or you want an India which is slightly unbalanced
[Guest]: because it's worried also about its boundaries, land boundaries, and therefore investing there.
[Guest]: And I think those are sort of reasons why there is no incentive to actually settle this
[Guest]: dispute.
[Guest]: So your objective is to keep it calm, to keep the border calm, but still keep it sufficiently
[Guest]: hot but not live so that India is focused over there.
[Guest]: And when time comes, when push comes to shove, you can talk about trying to move forward
[Guest]: towards resolving it.
[Guest]: You can also talk about trying to take certain steps forward to keep it calm and tranquil
[Guest]: while you keep India engaged.
[Guest]: So it keeps pumping its resources on the land boundary as opposed to looking at the maritime
[Guest]: domain.
[Guest]: And you keep sending India a message every time you feel that it's drifting too much
[Guest]: away from challenging your interests, whether with regard to the US or whether in the Indian
[Guest]: Ocean region or whether in broader South Asia, by sort of creating a mini crisis, which you
[Guest]: know that is in your interest and in India's interest to manage, because also you know,
[Guest]: the Chinese know, Beijing knows that conflict with India is also not in its interest.
[Guest]: India is not a small country.
[Guest]: India is a powerful country with substantial capacity.
[Guest]: And push comes to shove, Beijing will have to suffer substantial damage.
[Guest]: And you don't want to suffer that damage.
[Amit Varma]: So that's the objective.
[Amit Varma]: Since you mentioned broader South Asia, let's kind of talk about the neighborhood now.
[Amit Varma]: I'll quote another bit from an analyst called Colonel Gurmeet Kanwal, writing in 99 and
[Amit Varma]: again, this was quoted in Gawar's book, which is where I've picked the quote from where
[Amit Varma]: he talks about the Chinese policy of strategic encirclement.
[Amit Varma]: And he writes, quote, while China professes a policy of peace and friendliness towards
[Amit Varma]: India, its deeds clearly indicate that concentrated efforts are underway aimed at strategic encirclement
[Amit Varma]: of India.
[Amit Varma]: For the last several decades, China has been engaged in efforts to create a string of anti
[Amit Varma]: Indian influence around India through military and economic assistance programs to neighborly
[Amit Varma]: countries combined with complementary diplomacy.
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal and Sri Lanka have been assiduously and cleverly cultivated
[Amit Varma]: towards the same stop code.
[Amit Varma]: And what's happening is India is kind of aware of this.
[Amit Varma]: And in a diplomatic way, India fights back.
[Amit Varma]: Maldives was a recent sort of, you know, battleground, so to say of diplomatic efforts to this end
[Amit Varma]: where you know, both the parties concerned want a government that is friendly to them.
[Amit Varma]: How has this been playing out over the years, because, you know, Gawar also says elsewhere
[Amit Varma]: in his book, where he talks about the attitude of these other countries, quote, the most
[Amit Varma]: common response represented by Pakistan, Iran, Bangladesh, Myanmar and Sri Lanka is to see
[Amit Varma]: China as an again, a quote within a quote, a benign state whose power and independent
[Amit Varma]: role enhances their security by balancing other major states such as India or the United
[Amit Varma]: States or Russia that are the pivotal concern.
[Amit Varma]: Stop code so in one sense, a lot of these countries also welcome Chinese influence because
[Amit Varma]: of you, India as a neighborhood bully.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about how the dynamics of this has been playing out over the decades.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I think Gurmit Kawal's point in that book is well made.
[Guest]: And look, I think this has a lot to do with which perspective you want to look at it from.
[Guest]: If you're a strategist sitting in New Delhi, and you're seeing China investing in ports,
[Guest]: roads, infrastructure projects, finance, you know, across South Asia, in sort of military
[Guest]: to military diplomacy in countries in your neighborhood, you're bound to get concerned
[Guest]: and you're bound to see it from your prism saying that this is a string of influence
[Guest]: or more recently, as this conversation has been a string of pearls, which is being put
[Guest]: together to contain India.
[Guest]: So I can see that very logically from a Delhi strategist point of view.
[Guest]: But if you look at it from a Chinese point of view, this is a region which is underdeveloped,
[Guest]: unconnected with potential for growth with massive population.
[Guest]: Bangladesh is a very largely populated country.
[Guest]: Pakistan is a largely highly heavily populated country.
[Guest]: There are other countries which have significant strategically Sri Lanka, Myanmar, and you
[Guest]: and Maldives increasingly.
[Guest]: And you can see opportunities to build your support systems over there because so much
[Guest]: of your trade and energy is reliant on the Indian Ocean.
[Guest]: So the Chinese are looking at this also from the point of view of markets and opportunity,
[Guest]: and also some degree of strategic security because they feel threatened that their sealings
[Guest]: of communications can be disrupted in the Indian Ocean.
[Guest]: And particularly if you were to see India as a dominant power in the Indian Ocean region,
[Guest]: and that India wants to keep away extra regional powers, and there's a history of India wanting
[Guest]: to do that.
[Guest]: Our efforts in the Maldives in the late 80s, our attempt at sending the IPKF in Sri Lanka,
[Guest]: our recent sort of engagements in Sri Lanka and in the Maldives again, our engagement
[Guest]: with Bangladesh more recently.
[Guest]: There is an attempt at trying to build India, trying to ensure that India remains a dominant
[Guest]: power in the region.
[Guest]: Although increasingly, the rise of Chinese capacity and the rise of Chinese overall national
[Guest]: power driven by economic growth has begun to challenge that.
[Guest]: So from a Chinese perspective, if you look at India, which is viewed as fundamentally
[Guest]: hostile or potentially hostile as the largest power in this region, which is getting increasingly
[Guest]: closely aligned to the United States, which is a geopolitical rival, and which now is
[Guest]: partnering in, although differently interpreted, but the Indo-Pacific as an idea, which the
[Guest]: Chinese see as increasingly step moving towards containment of China.
[Guest]: You can see why they want to sort of, why this is a scope for greater hostility between
[Guest]: the two sides, because your interests are sort of rubbing against each other far more
[Guest]: vigorously and you're worried about this becoming a bigger issue.
[Guest]: But the third perspective of this is from the point of view of these individual states.
[Guest]: I'm going to leave Pakistan out of it because Pakistan has very different objectives.
[Guest]: But if you look at Sri Lanka, the Maldives, Bangladesh, Myanmar, these are states where
[Guest]: there is a deep development deficit.
[Guest]: These are states which have had complex domestic history.
[Guest]: Sri Lanka has gone through a domestic, has gone through a civil war.
[Guest]: Bangladesh has deep issues in party and infrastructure deficit.
[Guest]: The Myanmar's have been dealing with the civil war and national isolation for a very long
[Guest]: period of time to then becoming a democratic country after serious, after prolonged dictatorial
[Guest]: sort of army junta rule.
[Guest]: These are countries that are looking at opportunities for development.
[Guest]: And the Chinese are increasingly saying that, yes, we want to invest.
[Guest]: We have the money.
[Guest]: We have the political will.
[Guest]: But we want to invest.
[Guest]: We want to pursue development projects.
[Guest]: For these countries, this is an opportunity not just to balance against India as the quote
[Guest]: that you said pointed out, you know, you see it as an opportunity to balance Indian influence,
[Guest]: but you also see it as an opportunity to ensure that you develop.
[Guest]: So you're hedging with India, but you're also accepting certain influence to develop.
[Guest]: But that does not mean that you necessarily give away your agency.
[Guest]: You still as a small state command significant agency to be able to maneuver between larger
[Guest]: states to achieve your foreign policy objectives.
[Guest]: And increasingly, if you see how the Chinese, at least publicly and how India also publicly
[Guest]: is now talking about some of these countries, there's a far more.
[Guest]: So today you see India talking about things like non-reciprocal foreign policy gestures
[Guest]: in the region where you're being the bigger actor, which is not really demanding things.
[Guest]: Although, yes, you are demanding certain security interests be kept in mind.
[Guest]: The second thing is that you're looking at promoting democracy.
[Guest]: You're looking at talking about sovereignty of states being respected.
[Guest]: The Chinese have played this game for a very long time where they keep talking about the
[Guest]: importance of sovereignty, whether you're large or small, and particularly in the context
[Guest]: of India and India's role in the region, they keep emphasizing with some of these other
[Guest]: countries that, you know, we respect your sovereignty as opposed to, you know, this
[Guest]: bully India.
[Guest]: But India is sort of beginning to adapt to that thing.
[Guest]: So I think there are these three perspectives from which you need to look at Chinese investments
[Guest]: and the rise of China in the region.
[Guest]: India's policy under this current government with regard to Nepal a couple of years ago
[Guest]: when we imposed that blockade, opened the scope for China to expand its reach in the
[Guest]: country, right?
[Guest]: Just this week, we've had Xi Jinping visit Nepal.
[Guest]: He's the first Chinese president to visit the country in 23 years.
[Guest]: Nepal is an ally of India in many ways.
[Guest]: It's got such a deep relationship with India.
[Guest]: Its trade with India is about six to seven billion dollars.
[Guest]: Its trade with China is about a billion dollars.
[Guest]: But that's picked up in the last few years.
[Guest]: And yet China has been able to make increase in roads.
[Guest]: Part of that is because Nepal is looking for newer opportunities and newer financing.
[Guest]: But part of that is also because increasingly our influence has been seen as problematic
[Guest]: by Nepal.
[Guest]: And that's punctuated by the last blockade that we imposed, which created more complications.
[Guest]: So there are ways in which these states will also act.
[Guest]: So my sort of broad takeaway to anybody looking at this particular issue is that, yes, from
[Guest]: a Delhi strategic point of view and from an Indian interest point of view, some of these
[Guest]: Chinese investments are a matter of concern.
[Guest]: And yes, I can see why one would think of a string of influence being stretched together.
[Guest]: From a Chinese point of view, there are many more imperatives than just encircling India
[Guest]: that are going into this approach.
[Guest]: And thirdly, from the point of view of these states, which have their own individual agency,
[Guest]: which often gets lost in the conversation about two great powers challenging each other
[Guest]: in the region, is that these states have their own agency.
[Guest]: And it's not really easy to push around and influence and manipulate them into action,
[Guest]: because they might be small states in some ways, but they command large populations.
[Guest]: Bangladesh, particularly, is an increasingly growing, fast growing economy, and they have
[Guest]: strategic significance.
[Guest]: So while you still see contests being played out, their own agency is not insignificant.
[Amit Varma]: So moving on from the elephant in the elevator, let's talk about the elephant in the room,
[Amit Varma]: which is, you know, which we haven't met, the neighbor we haven't mentioned so far,
[Amit Varma]: which is Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: You know, China's become friendlier with Pakistan in the past, they've invested more there,
[Amit Varma]: they have more leverage there to influence matters, their incentives have changed, Pakistan's
[Amit Varma]: incentives have changed.
[Amit Varma]: How is all this sort of affecting the neighborhood?
[Amit Varma]: And is it good for us?
[Amit Varma]: Is it bad for us?
[Guest]: I guess it's in terms of it being good for us or bad for us.
[Guest]: I mean, that time will tell.
[Guest]: But I think there are certain changes that are happening, which we need to keep in mind.
[Guest]: So China's relationship with Pakistan, starting from the late 50s and the 60s, when they start
[Guest]: to cozy up with each other much more, until they eventually develop this bond, which is
[Guest]: higher than the highest mountains and sweeter than honey and deeper than the deepest seas,
[Guest]: until they develop this iron brother bond, predominantly militarily driven, it's predominantly
[Guest]: driven by a common sense of threat perception with regard to India.
[Guest]: And from a Chinese point of view, Pakistan is a useful partner in keeping India unbalanced.
[Guest]: Increasingly the security element sort of develops.
[Guest]: So from 60s, 70s, 80s, you see predominantly this being a security partnership.
[Guest]: China assists Pakistan in its missile development program and its nuclear program.
[Guest]: Today that's expanded to actually even assisting Pakistan in joint development of fighter jets,
[Guest]: submarine programs, to increasingly even supporting its new sort of security propositions in terms
[Guest]: of city security, citywide sort of policing grid and those sorts of things.
[Guest]: So the security engagement has deepened over the years, and that primarily led the partnership.
[Guest]: But starting sort of from the 2000s onwards to CPEC being launched in 2013, 2014, you
[Guest]: start to see this economic engagement becoming far more important.
[Guest]: The military to military partnership still dominates this relationship, but increasingly
[Guest]: the economic engagement has become important.
[Guest]: That has to do with a couple of reasons.
[Guest]: The Chinese see a desire in necessarily expanding their stake in Pakistan directly because there
[Guest]: are strategic interests involved.
[Guest]: Gwadar, we've often spoken about Gwadar as a potential Chinese base or Jivani in Pakistan
[Guest]: as a potential Chinese base.
[Guest]: Those could still come to be, yes, there could be potential bases, if not a formal full-fledged
[Guest]: base.
[Guest]: But the same could happen if increasing Chinese vessels are manufactured or sold to Pakistanis.
[Guest]: You will have maintenance depots and spare parts systems being put up in Pakistan, which
[Guest]: could therefore be a synthesized Pakistani Navy providing support to Chinese vessels
[Guest]: in the sea because you've got enough spare parts and you've got enough systems in place
[Guest]: to service those vessels.
[Guest]: So you're going to see that increase.
[Guest]: But the economic aspect through CPEC, where China is presently invested about 20, $22
[Guest]: billion in Pakistan, and those investment is not directly in terms of actual equity
[Guest]: investments.
[Guest]: They are sort of loans.
[Guest]: There are preferential loans.
[Guest]: There are really steep loans at very terrible interest rates, terribly opaque investments.
[Guest]: But that's gone across the board in energy, infrastructure, roadways, railways, agriculture,
[Guest]: more increasingly, sort of SME sector.
[Guest]: And they're doing all of that.
[Guest]: So essentially, you're embracing each other far more tightly.
[Guest]: That brings with, from an Indian point of view, there are a couple of things that that
[Guest]: brings.
[Guest]: One is that the closer you are, the closer you are on a daily basis, the more sort of
[Guest]: distance, what's that saying?
[Guest]: That distance generates fondness.
[Guest]: Proximity will generate friction.
[Guest]: So the closer you are, there will be friction.
[Guest]: And we've seen some of this, right?
[Guest]: Some Chinese workers who are in Pakistan have sort of abused people and there's been violence.
[Guest]: There's been cases where Chinese people have been accused of human trafficking, where women
[Guest]: in Pakistan, particularly Christian women in Pakistan, have been married to Chinese
[Guest]: men and then taken to China and then sold either into prostitution or they've been abused.
[Guest]: And that's become a problem socially, where there is an investigation that is launched
[Guest]: by Pakistani police forces, although the Pakistani government and even the legislatures across
[Guest]: the country sort of say things like, well, this is all external propaganda, while essentially
[Guest]: police forces in Pakistan have filed these complaints and are investigating hundreds
[Guest]: of such cases.
[Guest]: But there is, this sort of gives you a sense that there is social friction that's going
[Guest]: to increasingly happen.
[Guest]: The other thing is that if you go back to a couple of years ago, not a couple of years
[Guest]: ago, but quite a few years ago, when that Lal Masjid siege happened during Musharraf
[Guest]: reign in Pakistan, the reason for those terrorists to go and take over that Lal Masjid was essentially
[Guest]: because they were fed up with Chinese presence because of the cultural clash with Chinese
[Guest]: massage parlours in the cities, violating cultural norms in Pakistan.
[Guest]: So I think that those sort of frictions are going to increase and that proximity will
[Guest]: breed some degree of contempt for sure.
[Guest]: The other broad thing is that because China has far more greatly invested in Pakistan
[Guest]: and now many more Chinese actors from state firms to private firms are invested, the matrix
[Guest]: of interest and the actors who are interested changes and that might influence potential
[Guest]: government policy.
[Guest]: China would be far more keen to see stability in Pakistan and also stability in the India-Pakistan
[Guest]: relationship because that will impact its economic gains in Pakistan and its investments
[Guest]: in Pakistan.
[Guest]: So increasingly because of this expanded role in Pakistan, you're seeing the Chinese act
[Guest]: essentially as colonial powers.
[Guest]: The Chinese ambassador holds meetings with provincial leaders across the country, tries
[Guest]: to broker solutions and you don't see ambassadors in other countries play such roles.
[Guest]: But the Chinese ambassador is doing that.
[Guest]: He's essentially become a governor general in some ways.
[Guest]: And that will also lead to its own sense of friction within society over the course of
[Guest]: time because you suddenly see a sense of loss of political authority, loss of sovereignty.
[Guest]: And as people start to feel that while the economic gains that are promised don't necessarily
[Guest]: materialise as rapidly as they are promised, that could potentially lead to friction.
[Guest]: Like I said, from an Indian point of view, what you're seeing is that China is far more
[Guest]: invested in stability in Pakistan that could result in some degree of cooperation between
[Guest]: India and China on issues of terrorism, not just in Pakistan, but also because of Chinese
[Guest]: additional interests across the Middle East and the fulcrum of terror that Pakistan is,
[Guest]: it links to the Middle East.
[Guest]: And therefore, you could see greater Indian-Chinese cooperation on terrorism.
[Guest]: But my hopes are not very high on that, but there is a possibility of doing more in that
[Guest]: regard.
[Guest]: The other broad thing is that increasingly China's interest becomes in managing the mistrust
[Guest]: and the conflict between India and Pakistan.
[Guest]: So you might potentially see China wanting to play a greater role as a broker between
[Guest]: India and Pakistan.
[Guest]: And there are some signs of that.
[Guest]: In the last couple of months, you've seen the Chinese, despite going to the UN Security
[Guest]: Council, say things like India and Pakistan are both friendliest partners of China.
[Guest]: And we wish that you both could leave historical issues and work on development and we will
[Guest]: help you with that.
[Guest]: So you want to play the big brother, the balancer.
[Guest]: But the challenge is, would India ever accept something like that?
[Guest]: Would India use China as an instrument at certain times to talk to the Pakistanis?
[Guest]: Perhaps.
[Guest]: But you see the Chinese as a mediator or as a balancer in the region, highly unlikely
[Guest]: that India would accept such a proposition.
[Guest]: So that's how the Chinese role is evolving.
[Guest]: And Beijing's attempt would predominantly be to ensure that, yes, this conflict can
[Guest]: sustain, but the mistrust and the problems between the two sides can be managed.
[Guest]: And it has a role to play in managing that.
[Amit Varma]: No, and while we may not accept them as a mediator, I think from the Indian point of
[Amit Varma]: view, it just strikes me as a very good development because one, as you pointed out, China's incentives
[Amit Varma]: change, they want a stable Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: They don't want a Pakistan which is indulging in all the kind of cross-border terrorism
[Amit Varma]: they do across different borders.
[Amit Varma]: And from Pakistan's point of view, their incentives to, you know, to hasten their own economic
[Amit Varma]: development is to sort of toe the China line and get stability.
[Amit Varma]: So that's that sort of also seems very welcome to me.
[Amit Varma]: And my next question is about both India and China being nuclear.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, for example, there is, you know, a popular perception in India that, hey, we
[Amit Varma]: went nuclear in the late 90s because it was Pakistan we were worried about.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, Vajpayee himself justified going nuclear by writing a letter to Bill Clinton
[Amit Varma]: at that time, which later got leaked, where he said that he was responding to China's
[Amit Varma]: threats.
[Amit Varma]: And it is those elliptical threats from China, which made him sort of go nuclear.
[Amit Varma]: What's your take on this?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I think we went nuclear because of China.
[Guest]: I think we went nuclear because of China, because I don't think our primary concern
[Guest]: was Pakistan.
[Guest]: Pakistan plays a role in this in the sense that we see it as I think we went nuclear
[Guest]: not necessarily just because of China.
[Guest]: So Pakistan was a factor, China was a bigger factor.
[Guest]: But the biggest factor was, to my mind, was the sense of aspiration in India of achieving
[Guest]: a certain kind of power status.
[Guest]: I think that is what predominantly drove that policy.
[Guest]: From a security threat perspective, yes, our security threats are Pakistan and China.
[Guest]: More so increasingly, China was seen as a threat given that India had started to begin
[Guest]: its sort of growth trajectory.
[Guest]: And China had also started its sort of growth trajectory.
[Guest]: But that was a period of time, 1998, where China was actually in a fairly, China was
[Guest]: sort of very reluctant to be aggressive, because it was looking at the possibility of entering
[Guest]: the WTO.
[Guest]: So it didn't like the idea of it being painted as this aggressive entity.
[Guest]: And there wasn't any immediate sort of threat.
[Guest]: But it was important for us to go nuclear on multiple fronts.
[Guest]: After we went nuclear, the Kargil War happened.
[Guest]: And when the Kargil War happened, you saw the Chinese being very circumspect in how
[Guest]: they reacted to Pakistan.
[Guest]: You saw the Americans very clearly telling that Pakistan is what they should be doing,
[Guest]: and telling Bill Clinton very clearly telling Nawaz Sharif that he needs to step out and
[Guest]: take responsibility for this and pull back.
[Guest]: So I think going nuclear, therefore, was important from not just maintaining, changing the dynamics
[Guest]: of the conflict with Pakistan, but also signaling to the Chinese that, you know, any misadventures
[Guest]: will be handled, you know, we've got the capacity to handle anything that escalates.
[Guest]: And you need to think twice before escalating anything.
[Guest]: And I think the concern has to do a lot to do with the fact that, you know, how would
[Guest]: Beijing react in a conflict with Pakistan also, I don't think we immediately saw ourselves
[Guest]: in a conflict with the Chinese because the Chinese were pursuing very different economic
[Guest]: and very different foreign policy and economic agendas.
[Guest]: But the threat was via Pakistan, potentially China, and how do you deter China?
[Guest]: And I think that was predominantly what was going on.
[Amit Varma]: So I did an episode on the India Pakistan conflict with Srinath Raghavan, where we discussed
[Amit Varma]: the game theory of it and all of that and and also an episode on India going nuclear
[Amit Varma]: with your colleague, General Prakash Menon.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the points both of them made was that before we went nuclear, you know, our
[Amit Varma]: conventional army was obviously considered to be much better than Pakistan's, but both
[Amit Varma]: sides going nuclear sort of put them on parity.
[Amit Varma]: And it also means that when India deals with Pakistan, there is a certain line we cannot
[Amit Varma]: cross because we don't know how they will react.
[Amit Varma]: Is that also the case between India and China, except that now we are the weaker side, but
[Amit Varma]: being nuclear helps it means they can't, you know, push us around too much?
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Yeah, it makes a difference, right?
[Guest]: I mean, what's fascinating is that both India and China are subscribed to the no first use
[Guest]: policy.
[Guest]: So both sides expressly state that we are committed to not using nuclear weapons first.
[Guest]: But from a signaling point of view for the Chinese, I mean, look, in 1998, I don't see
[Guest]: the disparity between India and China in terms of its armed forces being that massive.
[Guest]: But the potential of that being a big problem going forward, particularly with India facing
[Guest]: threats on two fronts at any point of time, is where to my mind, this decision comes into
[Guest]: play from a security threat perspective, that you will signal to the Chinese that there
[Guest]: will be escalation from our side if this is happening.
[Guest]: Although you're saying that, you know, we're subscribed to no first use.
[Guest]: To me, a lot of our reason to actually go nuclear had to do with our desire for power,
[Guest]: and power in the sense of national power, as that, you know, we wanted to express ourselves
[Guest]: as an international power with a certain kind of capacity.
[Guest]: It had security, it has signaling value to our immediate adversaries, but it has a lot
[Guest]: to do with our own internal sense of power.
[Guest]: Because if you remember, the narrative and the reaction of the country upon going nuclear,
[Guest]: it was about us arriving at the world stage.
[Guest]: And to me, as much as the security sort of aspect of it was important, that was one of
[Guest]: the underlying motives that we need to be doing this.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, we've spoken for more than two hours, and we have yet to reach the sort
[Amit Varma]: of the current situation where we stand today.
[Amit Varma]: And you obviously written a wonderful paper for Takshashila on this just before the current
[Amit Varma]: meet happened, the recent meet happened between she and Modi, which I'll link from the show
[Amit Varma]: notes, but sort of sum up for me briefly that what are the issues now at stake?
[Amit Varma]: Where does the relationship now stand?
[Amit Varma]: You know, what did the previous Wuhan meet achieve?
[Amit Varma]: And what can the two sides realistically achieve going forward?
[Guest]: So okay, so what did Wuhan achieve?
[Guest]: Now, Wuhan came at an interesting time, right?
[Guest]: It was April 2018.
[Guest]: We'd just gone through a very difficult period in the bilateral relationship.
[Guest]: And with the Doklam stand of sort of punctuating the difficult period, there were tensions
[Guest]: between India and China over the listing of Masood Azhar as a terrorist of the United
[Guest]: Nations.
[Guest]: There were tensions about India's entry into the nuclear suppliers group, which China had
[Guest]: been blocking.
[Guest]: So India got a sense that terrorism, which is a core interest of ours, the Chinese are
[Guest]: not respecting that, given the overwhelming evidence that exists on aspirational interests,
[Guest]: which is the nuclear supplier group, the Chinese are not respecting our aspirations.
[Guest]: And then we have entered into this punctuated conflict in Doklam, in which sort of the fundamentals
[Guest]: that were keeping us stable, like India's argument was in 2012, we had an agreement
[Guest]: that in places where there's a tri-junction between India, China and a third country on
[Guest]: the boundary, you know, status quo would be maintained and Chinese, then the Chinese were
[Guest]: building that road in Doklam, were violating that status quo.
[Guest]: And therefore, the Chinese were being far more assertive and not respecting our interests
[Guest]: and our aspirations at all.
[Guest]: And therefore, we had to do what we had to do.
[Guest]: That standoff eventually led to some sort of a de-escalator mechanism where both sides
[Guest]: start to realize that we need to be talking before this spirals into something bigger.
[Guest]: And we need to be talking at a leader level because we need to set up some sort of a protocol
[Guest]: of how do we see our relationship.
[Guest]: Because things have changed from the last time we had this big conversation, which was
[Guest]: 1988, when Rajiv Gandhi visited, and we created a template for this relationship saying, we'll
[Guest]: put the difficult issues aside, we'll try and negotiate confidence building measures
[Guest]: and we'll try and maintain peace on the boundary while focusing on economic development.
[Guest]: And things have changed since then.
[Guest]: And that was a point of time where we were at relative economic parity.
[Guest]: In fact, India was probably a little bit ahead in terms of its GDP.
[Guest]: And you know, things have changed since then.
[Guest]: Today, the scenario is completely different.
[Guest]: Both of us have broader interests now.
[Guest]: So in Wuhan, when they met, when Xi Jinping and Modi met, essentially the conversation
[Guest]: was about how do you set up a new template?
[Guest]: And what was the new template that they came up with?
[Guest]: They basically said that, okay, look, we need to advance this relationship by keeping a
[Guest]: long term perspective in mind and not letting short term issues derail this.
[Guest]: We need to respect each other's sensitivities and aspirations.
[Guest]: We need to also pursue deeper and broad based engagement.
[Guest]: So we need to meet more regularly, not just at a leader level, but we also need to make
[Guest]: sure that engagement is broad based.
[Guest]: So people to people.
[Guest]: And that's absolutely great.
[Guest]: Because you know, we have about 200,000 Chinese tourists that come to India every year.
[Guest]: China sends about 130 million tourists to the world.
[Guest]: And we have 200,000 of them visiting India.
[Guest]: India should be having far more Chinese tourists coming in.
[Guest]: There should be far greater educational linkages.
[Guest]: There should be movies and all that.
[Guest]: That linkage should happen so that this deep abiding sense of lack of information with
[Guest]: each other and suspicion, therefore, can start to go away.
[Guest]: You should have far more scholarly exchanges to understand what the other side is thinking
[Guest]: or what drives the other side's actions.
[Guest]: Because that was one of the reasons why we sort of went through this downward spiral in
[Guest]: the 50s and the 60s.
[Guest]: So those are good ideas.
[Guest]: The third big thing was to maintain peace and tranquility along the boundary while trying
[Guest]: to identify specific confidence building measures to do that.
[Guest]: And in the course of the year since Wuhan, there were steps taken.
[Guest]: The boundary patrols became staggered, decided a certain time periods where you would patrol
[Guest]: certain areas because each side perceives a different area as well as the LAC lies.
[Guest]: And you would not sort of enter into eyeball confrontation.
[Guest]: You'd sort of keep distances.
[Guest]: You'd inform each other a little bit more about what you're doing.
[Guest]: And that has meant some degree of stability because since Wuhan, there were no major incidents
[Guest]: at the boundary until September this year when there was a bit of a flash point in Ladakh,
[Guest]: which also because the protocols that were set in place was addressed within 24 hours.
[Guest]: In the past, these have gone on for days and days and weeks even.
[Guest]: So that was what Wuhan was.
[Guest]: And the broader dictum that sort of underlined all of this was this idea that differences
[Guest]: must not be allowed to turn into disputes.
[Guest]: To me, this is an extremely interesting statement because it says that we acknowledge that there
[Guest]: are differences.
[Guest]: There's an acknowledgement there.
[Guest]: And there is a hope that policy will ensure that this does not escalate.
[Guest]: And therefore, it calls for action for policy to not let this escalate.
[Guest]: And the action is in this context, by maintaining peace at the border through different protocols,
[Guest]: by expanding engagement at across levels, and by ensuring that you build the economic
[Guest]: relationship and talk about some of these prickly issues.
[Guest]: The prickly issues that persist are the same.
[Guest]: Are the border, are our aspirations, are each side's aspirations, China's in the Indian
[Guest]: Ocean and broader geopolitically with regard to India's relationship with the US, India's
[Guest]: with regard to China's relationship with Pakistan, but not just Pakistan, China's role in the
[Guest]: broader South Asian region, China's policies of limiting India's rise in the international
[Guest]: order, whether it is the NSG, whether it is the UN Security Council reform, issues of
[Guest]: new technologies, how do you mitigate some of the threats, what is a threat that China
[Guest]: poses in cases of say 5G and Huawei, and how does India mitigate that, yet partner with
[Guest]: them on science and technology cooperation, because China is increasingly a powerhouse
[Guest]: when it comes to science and technology.
[Guest]: So the idea is to be able to find spaces where you can work together while manage the risks
[Guest]: that you each perceive from each other.
[Guest]: And that's broadly what this process of informal symmetry is supposed to do.
[Guest]: That could be in trade, that could be in technology, that could be on security issues.
[Guest]: The problem that I have with informal symmetry is that it is informal.
[Guest]: So you don't necessarily formally commit yourself to some targets.
[Guest]: We've been talking about addressing the trade deficit with China for nearly seven, eight
[Guest]: years to a decade.
[Guest]: Very little has been done and very little has been done because there is no target.
[Guest]: There is no clear policy direction apart from a rhetorical commitment that yes, this is
[Guest]: something that we need to do.
[Guest]: We need to achieve more balanced trade.
[Guest]: There are structural reasons why there is a trade deficit, but there are also very clear
[Guest]: political reasons, which are China's market restrictions, where our pharmaceutical companies
[Guest]: find it difficult to go over there, our exporters find it difficult to sell products over there
[Guest]: because of restrictions that are placed through non-tariff barriers on say things like inspections,
[Guest]: customs, and those sorts of things.
[Guest]: And I think the informal symmetry is great to set the big picture agenda, but I'm really
[Guest]: hoping that we don't continue with this mechanism, although I know that after this recent meeting
[Guest]: in Mamlapuram, they've decided that there's going to be another informal summit next year.
[Guest]: I'm really hoping that increasingly we see more delegation level talks happening even
[Guest]: at these summits.
[Guest]: Thankfully, at this summit, there was a day of delegation level talks.
[Guest]: Hopefully these will now become more concrete going forward because the optics will soon
[Guest]: become stale.
[Guest]: And what will matter is whether you actually achieve some policy objectives and for that
[Guest]: you need to actually be talking specifics.
[Amit Varma]: Manoj, I've taken a lot of your time.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks so much for talking to me today.
[Amit Varma]: It was as usual, I learned a lot from you.
[Guest]: Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: It's been a pleasure talking to you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do check out the show notes, which links Manoj's
[Amit Varma]: paper for Takshashila as well as all the other episodes of the scene and the unseen and the
[Amit Varma]: Pragati podcast and all things policy that he's appeared on.
[Amit Varma]: Much wisdom there.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Manoj on Twitter at the China dude.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of the scene and the unseen at sceneunseen.in, thinkpragati.com
[Amit Varma]: and ivmpodcast.com.
[Amit Varma]: The scene and the unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution.
[Amit Varma]: Their postgraduate course in public policy starts in January.
[Amit Varma]: Admissions are open now.
[Amit Varma]: Do check it out at takshashila.org.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Do you wish you were smarter?
[Unknown]: Well, so do we.
[Unknown]: But the next best thing, we could make you sound smarter and to help you with this endeavor,
[Unknown]: we are simplified a podcast that attempts to break down the complex world around you
[Unknown]: with a little knowledge, a lot of poor jokes and a ton of random trivia.
[Unknown]: Episodes out every Monday on the IBM podcast app or wherever you get your podcasts.
[Unknown]: See ya.
[Unknown]: Every week comes a show where three people come together to tell you about stuff they
[Unknown]: like, a movie, a TV show, a book and other stuff.
[Unknown]: Tune in every Monday on the IBM podcast app to IBM Likes.
[Unknown]: Batman approves this message.
[Unknown]: Thank you, Batman.